PAMPHLET 3
James Otis, The Rights of the British Colonies Asserted and
Proved. Boston, 1764.
In 1733 the British government had levied a prohibitory high duty of six pence a gallon on foreign
molasses imported into the North American colonies. This had been designed to keep French West
Indian molasses—a by-product of sugar refining used in the making of rum—out of the hands of the
colonists in order to prevent them from developing a rum industry that would rival that of the British
West Indian sugar planters. By contrast, France, fearing competition to its wine and brandy industry,
had forbidden its colonial sugar planters from using their own surplus molasses to make rum. Hence
the French planters always had lots of leftover molasses to sell. Since the high tariff had not kept
foreign molasses out of the English colonies—the Americans being very efficient smugglers and rum
producers—the British administration finally concluded in 1764 that lowering the tariff to three
pence a gallon not only would make it revenue-generating but would eliminate the colonists’ need to
smuggle molasses and bribe customs officials. The former prohibitory tariff designed in 1733 to
regulate colonial trade now suddenly appeared to resemble a tax.
This Sugar Act of 1764 and the accompanying new trade regulations signaled a change in the longstanding relationship between the mother country and America. These initial efforts at imperial
reform stirred up a series of colonial protests and writings, of which this pamphlet by James Otis of
Massachusetts was one of the most radical and far-reaching. Reprinted in London before the year was
out, it was advertised there as “universally approved” of in the colonies and “highly necessary for the
perusal of the members of both houses, and of such who chuse to make themselves masters of an
argument so little understood, but of so great consequence to every British subject, and lover of
constitutional Liberty.”
Just as it was one of the most influential pamphlets of the early stages of the American crisis,
Otis’s Rights was also one of the most complicated and seemingly self-contradictory, here avowing
that Parliament’s “uncontrollable” power must be obeyed, there averring that no legislature, not even
Parliament, could deprive individuals—and remarkably for his time, he makes clear he does not
mean just white individuals—of their natural rights. The apparent contradiction disappears once it is
understood that Otis conceived of Parliament in an old-fashioned, even medieval sense and in the
same terms that Chief Justice Edward Coke had invoked in the seventeenth century. Parliament to

Otis, as it was to Coke, was a court that discovered the law, not a legislature that willed it. Parliament
was undoubtedly supreme, but, like any court administering the common law, it could never be
arbitrary; as soon as it discovered any mistake it had made, it would correct it, just as Coke had
corrected Parliament in Dr. Bonham’s case when it had mistakenly made a man a judge in his own
cause in violation of the common law.
At once outdated and visionary, clinging to a legal fiction at odds with the realities of eighteenthcentury politics even as it argued for natural rights in a way that many regarded as dangerously
revolutionary, Otis’s Rights left its author vulnerable to criticism from all sides.

INTRODUCTION OF THE ORIGIN OF
GOVERNMENT.

T

HE

origin of government has in all ages no less perplexed the heads of

lawyers and politicians, than the origin of evil has embarrassed

divines and philosophers: And ’tis probable the world may receive a
satisfactory solution on both those points of enquiry at the same time.
The various opinions on the origin of government have been reduced
to four. 1. That dominion is founded in Grace. 2. On force or meer power.
3. On compact. 4. On property.
The first of these opinions is so absurd, and the world has paid so very
dear for embracing it, especially under the administration of the roman
pontiffs, that mankind seem at this day to be in a great measure cured of
their madness in this particular; and the notion is pretty generally exploded,
and hiss’d off the stage.
To those who lay the foundation of government in force and meer
brutal power, it is objected; that, their system destroys all distinction
between right and wrong; that it overturns all morality, and leaves it to
every man to do what is right in his own eyes; that it leads directly to
scepticism, and ends in atheism. When a man’s will and pleasure is his only
rule and guide, what safety can there be either for him or against him, but in
the point of a sword?
On the other hand the gentlemen in favor of the original compact have
been often told that their system is chimerical and unsupported by reason or
experience. Questions like the following have been frequently asked them,
and may be again.

“When and where was the original compact for introducing
government into any society, or for creating a society, made? Who were
present and parties to such compact? Who acted for infants and women, or
who appointed guardians for them? Had these guardians power to bind both
infants and women during life, and their posterity after them? Is it in nature
or reason that a guardian should by his own act perpetuate his power over
his ward, and bind him and his posterity in chains? Is not every man born as
free by nature as his father? Has he not the same natural right to think and
act and contract for himself? Is it possible for a man to have a natural right
to make a slave of himself or of his posterity? Can a father supersede the
laws of nature? What man is or ever was born free, if every man is not?
What will there be to distinguish the next generation of men from their
forefathers, that they should not have the same right to make original
compacts as their ancestors had? If every man has such right, may there not
be as many original compacts as there are men and women born or to be
born? Are not women born as free as men? Would it not be infamous to
assert that the ladies are all slaves by nature? If every man and woman born
or to be born has, and will have, a right to be consulted, and must accede to
the original compact before they can with any kind of justice be said to be
bound by it, will not the compact be ever forming and never finished, ever
making but never done? Can it with propriety be called a compact original
or derivative, that is ever in treaty but never concluded?”
When it has been said that each man is bound as soon as he accedes,
and that the consent may be either express or tacit, it has been asked, “What
is a tacit consent or compact? Does it not appear plain that those who refuse
their assent can not be bound? If one is at liberty to accede or not, is he not
also at liberty to recede on the discovery of some intolerable fraud and
abuse that has been palm’d upon him by the rest of the high contracting

parties? Will not natural equity in several special cases rescind the original
compacts of great men as effectualy as those of little men are rendered null
and void in the ordinary course of a court of chancery?”
There are other questions which have been started, and a resolution of
them demanded, which may perhaps be deemed indecent by those who hold
the prerogatives of an earthly monarch, and even the power of a plantation
government, so sacred as to think it little less than blasphemy to enquire
into their origin and foundation: while the government of the supreme ruler
of the universe is every day discussed with less ceremony and decency than
the administration of a petty German prince. I hope the reader will consider
that I am at present only mentioning such questions as have been put by
high-flyers & others in church and state, who would exclude all compact
between a Sovereign and his people, without offering my own sentiments
upon them; this however I presume I may be allowed hereafter to do
without offence. Those who want a full answer to them may consult Mr.
Locke’s discourses on government, M. De Vattel’s law of nature and
nations, and their own consciences.
“What state were Great-Britain, Ireland and the Plantations left in by
the abdication of James II? Was it a state of nature or of civil government?
If a state of civil government, where were the supreme legislative and
executive powers from the abdication to the election of William and Mary?
Could the Lords and Commons be called a complete parliament or supreme
power without a King to head them? Did any law of the land or any original
compact previous to the abdication provide, that on such an event, the
supreme power should devolve on the two houses? Were not both houses so
manifestly puzzled with the novelty and strangeness of the event, and so far
from finding any act of parliament, book-case, or precedent to help them,
that they disputed in solemn conferrence by what name to call the action,

and at last gave it one, as new in our language and in that of parliament as
the thing itself was in fact?”1
If on this memorable and very happy event the three kingdoms and the
dominions fell back into a state of nature, it will be asked, “Whether every
man and woman were not then equal? If so, had not every one of them a
natural and equitable right to be consulted in the choice of a new king, or in
the formation of a new original compact or government, if any new form
had been made? Might not the nation at that time have rightfully changed
the monarchy into a republic or any form, that might seem best? Could any
change from a state of nature take place without universal consent, or at
least without the consent of the majority of the individuals? Upon the
principles of the original compact as commonly explained and understood,
could a few hundred men who before the dissolution of the government had
been called, and in fact were, lords, knights and gentlemen, have lawfully
made that glorious deliverer and defender W. 3. rightful king?” Such an one
he certainly was, and such have been all his illustrious successors to the
present happy times; when we have the joy to see the sceptre sway’d in
justice, wisdom and mercy, by our lawful Sovereign George the Third; a
prince who glories in being a Briton born, and whom may God long
preserve and prosper.
“If upon the abdication all were reduced to a state of nature, had not
apple women and orange girls as good a right to give their respectable
suffrages for a new king as the philosopher, courtier, petit maitre and
politician? Were these and ten millions of others such ever more consulted
on that occasion, than the multitude now are in the adjustment of that real
modern farce, an election of a king of the Romans; which serves as a
contrast to the grandeur of the antient republics, and shows the littleness of

the modern German and some other gothic constitutions in their present
degenerate state?
“In the election of W. 3, were the votes of Ireland and the plantations
ever called for or once tho’t of till the affair was settled? Did the lords and
commons who happened to be then in and about Westminster represent, and
act, for the individuals, not only of the three kingdoms, but for all the
freeborn and as yet unconquered possessors and proprietors of their own
money-purchased, blood-purchased plantations, which, till lately, have been
defended with little or no assistance from Great-Britain? Were not those
who did not vote in or for the new model at liberty upon the principles of
the compact to remain in what some call the delectable state of nature, to
which by the hypothesis they were reduced, or to join themselves to any
other state, whose solemn league and covenant they could subscribe? Is it
not a first principle of the original compact, that all who are bound should
bind themselves? Will not common sense without much learning or study
dictate obvious answers to all the above questions?—and, say the opposers
of the original compact and of the natural equality and liberty of mankind,
will not those answers infallibly show that the doctrine is a piece of
metaphysical jargon and systematical nonsense?” Perhaps not.
With regard to the fourth opinion, that dominion is founded in
property, what is it but playing with words? Dominion in one sense of the
term is synonimous with property, so one cannot be called the foundation of
the other, but as one name may appear to be the foundation or cause of
another.
Property cannot be the foundation of dominion as synonimous with
government; for on the supposition that property has a precarious existence
antecedent to government, and tho’ it is also admitted that the security of
property is one end of government, but that of little estimation even in the

view of a miser when life and liberty of locomotion and further
accumulation are placed in competition, it must be a very absurd way of
speaking to assert that one end of government is the foundation of
government. If the ends of government are to be considered as its
foundation, it cannot with truth or propriety be said that government is
founded on any one of those ends; and therefore government is not founded
on property or its security alone, but at least on something else in
conjunction. It is however true in fact and experience, as the great, the
incomparable Harrington has most abundantly demonstrated in his Oceana,
and other divine writings, that Empire follows the balance of property: ’Tis
also certain that property in fact generally confers power, tho’ the possessor
of it may not have much more wit than a mole or a musquash: And this is
too often the cause, that riches are sought after, without the least concern
about the right application of them. But is the fault in the riches, or the
general law of nature, or the unworthy possessor? It will never follow from
all this, that government is rightfully founded on property, alone. What shall
we say then? Is not government founded on grace? No. Nor on force? No.
Nor on compact? Nor property? Not altogether on either. Has it any solid
foundation? any chief corner stone, but what accident, chance or confusion
may lay one moment and destroy the next? I think it has an everlasting
foundation in the unchangeable will of GOD, the author of nature, whose
laws never vary. The same omniscient, omnipotent, infinitely good and
gracious Creator of the universe, who has been pleased to make it necessary
that what we call matter should gravitate, for the celestial bodies to roll
round their axes, dance their orbits and perform their various revolutions in
that beautiful order and concert, which we all admire, has made it equally
necessary that from Adam and Eve to these degenerate days, the different
sexes should sweetly attract each other, form societies of single families, of

which larger bodies and communities are as naturally, mechanically, and
necessarily combined, as the dew of Heaven and the soft distilling rain is
collected by the all enliv’ning heat of the sun. Government is therefore most
evidently founded on the necessities of our nature. It is by no means an
arbitrary thing, depending merely on compact or human will for its
existence.
We come into the world forlorn and helpless; and if left alone and to
ourselves at any one period of our lives, we should soon die in want,
despair or destraction. So kind is that hand, tho’ little known or regarded,
which feeds the rich and the poor, the blind and the naked; and provides for
the safety of infants by the principle of parental love, and for that of men by
Government! We have a King, who neither slumbers nor sleeps, but
eternally watches for our good; whose rain falls on the just and on the
unjust: yet while they live, move, and have their being in him, and cannot
account for either, or for any thing else, so stupid and wicked are some men,
as to deny his existence, blaspheme his most evident government, and
disgrace their nature.
Let no Man think I am about to commence advocate for despotism,
because I affirm that government is founded on the necessity of our natures;
and that an original supreme Sovereign, absolute, and uncontroulable,
earthly power must exist in and preside over every society; from whose
final decisions there can be no appeal but directly to Heaven. It is therefore
originally and ultimately in the people. I say this supreme absolute power is
originally and ultimately in the people; and they never did in fact freely, nor
can they rightfully make an absolute, unlimited renunciation of this divine
right.2 It is ever in the nature of the thing given in trust, and on a condition,
the performance of which no mortal can dispence with; namely, that the
person or persons on whom the sovereignty is confer’d by the people, shall

incessantly consult their good. Tyranny of all kinds is to be abhor’d,
whether it be in the hands of one, or of the few, or of the many.—And tho’
“in the last age a generation of men sprung up that would flatter Princes
with an opinion that they have a divine right to absolute power”; yet
“slavery is so vile and miserable an estate of man, and so directly opposite
to the generous temper and courage of our nation, that ’tis hard to be
conceived that an englishman, much less a gentleman, should plead for it:”3
Especially at a time when the finest writers of the most polite nations on the
continent of Europe, are enraptured with the beauties of the civil
constitution of Great-Britain; and envy her, no less for the freedom of her
sons, than for her immense wealth and military glory.
But let the origin of government be placed where it may, the end of it
is manifestly the good of the whole. Salus populi suprema lex esto, is of the
law of nature, and part of that grand charter given the human race, (tho’ too
many of them are afraid to assert it,) by the only monarch in the universe,
who has a clear and indisputable right to absolute power; because he is the
only ONE who is omniscient as well as omnipotent.
It is evidently contrary to the first principles of reason, that supreme
unlimited power should be in the hands of one man. It is the greatest
“idolatry, begotten by flattery, on the body of pride,” that could induce one
to think that a single mortal should be able to hold so great a power, if ever
so well inclined. Hence the origin of deifying princes: It was from the trick
of gulling the vulgar into a belief that their tyrants were omniscient; and that
it was therefore right, that they should be considered as omnipotent. Hence
the Dii majorum et minorum gentium; the great, the monarchical, the little,
Provincial subordinate and subaltern gods, demi-gods, and semidemi-gods,
ancient and modern. Thus deities of all kinds were multiplied and increased
in abundance; for every devil incarnate, who could enslave a people,

acquired a title to divinity; and thus the “rabble of the skies” was made up
of locusts and catterpillars; lions, tygers and harpies; and other devourers
translated from plaguing the earth!4
The end of government being the good of mankind, points out its great
duties: It is above all things to provide for the security, the quiet, and happy
enjoyment of life, liberty, and property. There is no one act which a
government can have a right to make, that does not tend to the advancement
of the security, tranquility and prosperity of the people. If life, liberty and
property could be enjoyed in as great perfection in solitude, as in society,
there would be no need of government. But the experience of ages has
proved that such is the nature of man, a weak, imperfect being; that the
valuable ends of life cannot be obtained, without the union and assistance of
many. Hence ’tis clear that men cannot live apart or independent of each
other: In solitude men would perish; and yet they cannot live together
without contests. These contests require some arbitrator to determine them.
The necessity of a common, indifferent and impartial judge, makes all men
seek one; tho’ few find him in the sovereign power, of their respective
states or any where else in subordination to it.
Government is founded immediately on the necessities of human
nature, and ultimately on the will of God, the author of nature; who has not
left it to men in general to choose, whether they will be members of society
or not, but at the hazard of their senses if not of their lives. Yet it is left to
every man as he comes of age to chuse what society he will continue to
belong to. Nay if one has a mind to turn Hermit, and after he has been born,
nursed, and brought up in the arms of society, and acquired the habits and
passions of social life, is willing to run the risque of starving alone, which is
generally most unavoidable in a state of hermitage, who shall hinder him? I
know of no human law, founded on the law of nature, to restrain him from

separating himself from all the species, if he can find it in his heart to leave
them; unless it should be said, it is against the great law of selfpreservation: But of this every man will think himself his own judge.
The few Hermits and Misanthropes that have ever existed, show that
those states are unnatural. If we were to take out from them, those who
have made great worldly gain of their godly hermitage, and those who have
been under the madness of enthusiasm, or disappointed hopes in their
ambitious projects, for the detriment of mankind; perhaps there might not
be left ten from Adam to this day.
The form of government is by nature and by right so far left to the
individuals of each society, that they may alter it from a simple democracy
or government of all over all, to any other form they please. Such alteration
may and ought to be made by express compact: But how seldom this right
has been asserted, history will abundantly show. For once that it has been
fairly settled by compact; fraud, force or accident have determined it an
hundred times. As the people have gained upon tyrants, these have been
obliged to relax, only till a fairer opportunity has put it in their power to
encroach again.
But if every prince since Nimrod had been a tyrant, it would not prove
a right to tyranize. There can be no prescription old enough to supersede the
law of nature, and the grant of GOD almighty; who has given to all men a
natural right to be free, and they have it ordinarily in their power to make
themselves so, if they please.
Government having been proved to be necessary by the law of nature,
it makes no difference in the thing to call it from a certain period, civil. This
term can only relate to form, to additions to, or deviations from, the
substance of government: This being founded in nature, the superstructures
and the whole administration should be conformed to the law of universal

reason. A supreme legislative and a supreme executive power, must be
placed somewhere in every common-wealth: Where there is no other
positive provision or compact to the contrary, those powers remain in the
whole body of the people. It is also evident there can be but one best way of
depositing those powers; but what that way is, mankind have been disputing
in peace and in war more than five thousand years. If we could suppose the
individuals of a community met to deliberate, whether it were best to keep
those powers in their own hands, or dispose of them in trust, the following
questions would occur—Whether those two great powers of Legislation and
Execution should remain united? If so, whether in the hands of the many, or
jointly or severally in the hands of a few, or jointly in some one individual?
If both those powers are retained in the hands of the many, where nature
seems to have placed them originally, the government is a simple
democracy, or a government of all over all. This can be administred, only
by establishing it as a first principle, that the votes of the majority shall be
taken as the voice of the whole. If those powers are lodged in the hands of a
few, the government is an Aristocracy or Oligarchy.5 Here too the first
principles of a practicable administration is that the majority rules the
whole. If those great powers are both lodged in the hands of one man, the
government is a simple Monarchy, commonly, though falsly called
absolute, if by that term is meant a right to do as one pleases.—Sic volo, sic
jubeo, stet pro ratione voluntas, belongs not of right to any mortal man.
The same law of nature and of reason is equally obligatory on a
democracy, an aristocracy, and a monarchy: Whenever the administrators,
in any of those forms, deviate from truth, justice and equity, they verge
towards tyranny, and are to be opposed; and if they prove incorrigible, they
will be deposed by the people, if the people are not rendered too abject.
Deposing the administrators of a simple democracy may sound oddly, but it

is done every day, and in almost every vote. A. B. & C. for example, make
a democracy. To day A & B are for so vile a measure as a standing army. To
morrow B & C vote it out. This is as really deposing the former
administrators, as setting up and making a new king is deposing the old one.
Democracy in the one case, and monarchy in the other, still remain; all that
is done is to change the administration.
The first principle and great end of government being to provide for
the best good of all the people, this can be done only by a supreme
legislative and executive ultimately in the people, or whole community,
where GOD has placed it; but the inconveniencies, not to say impossibility,
attending the consultations and operations of a large body of people, have
made it necessary to transfer the power of the whole to a few: This necessity
gave rise to deputation, proxy or a right of representation.
A Power of legislation, without a power of execution in the same or
other hands, would be futile and vain: On the other hand, a power of
execution, supreme or subordinate, without an independent legislature,
would be perfect despotism.
The difficulties attending an universal congress, especially when
society became large, have bro’t men to consent to a delegation of the
power of all: The weak and the wicked have too often been found in the
same interest, and in most nations have not only bro’t these powers jointly,
into the hands of one, or some few, of their number; but made them
hereditary, in the families of despotic nobles & princes.
The wiser and more virtuous states, have always provided that the
representation of the people should be numerous. Nothing but life and
liberty are naturally hereditable: this has never been considered by those,
who have tamely given up both into the hands of a tyrannical Oligarchy or
despotic Monarchy.

The analogy between the natural, or material, as it is called, and the
moral world is very obvious; GOD himself appears to us at some times to
cause the intervention or combination of a number of simple principles, tho’
never when one will answer the end; gravitation and attraction have place in
the revolution of the planets, because the one would fix them to a centre,
and the other would carry them off indefinitely; so in the moral world, the
first simple principle is equality and the power of the whole. This will
answer in small numbers; so will a tolerably virtuous Oligarchy or a
Monarchy. But when the society grows in bulk, none of them will answer
well singly, and none worse than absolute monarchy. It becomes necessary
therefore as numbers increase, to have those several powers properly
combined; so as from the whole to produce that harmony of government so
often talked of and wished for, but too seldom found in ancient or modern
states. The grand political problem in all ages has been to invent the best
combination or distribution of the supreme powers of legislation and
execution. Those states have ever made the greatest figure, and have been
most durable, in which those powers have not only been separated from
each other, but placed each in more hands than one, or a few. The Romans
are the most shining example; but they never had a balance between the
senate and the people, and the want of this, is generally agreed by the few
who know any thing of the matter, to have been the cause of their fall. The
British constitution in theory and in the present administration of it, in
general comes nearest the idea of perfection, of any that has been reduced
to practice; and if the principles of it are adhered to, it will according to the
infallible prediction of Harrington, always keep the Britons uppermost in
Europe, ’till their only rival nation shall either embrace that perfect model
of a common wealth given us by that author, or come as near it as Great
Britain is. Then indeed and not till then, will that rival & our nation either

be eternal confederates, or contend in greater earnest than they have ever
yet done, till one of them shall sink under the power of the other, and rise
no more.
Great Britain has at present, most evidently the advantage, and such
opportunities of honest wealth and grandeur, as perhaps no state ever had
before, at least not since the days of Julius Cæsar, the destroyer of the
roman glory and grandeur; at a time when but for him and his adherents
both might have been rendered immortal.
We have said that the form and mode of government is to be settled by
compact, as it was rightfully done by the convention after the abdication of
James II, and assented to by the first representative of the nation chosen
afterwards, and by every parliament, and by almost every man ever since,
but the bigots, to the indefeasible power of tyrants civil and ecclesiastic.
There was neither time for, nor occasion to call the whole people together:
If they had not liked the proceedings it was in their power to controul them;
as it would be should the supreme legislative or executive powers ever
again attempt to enslave them. The people will bear a great deal, before
they will even murmur against their rulers: But when once they are
thoroughly roused, and in earnest, against those who would be glad to
enslave them, their power is irresistible.6
At the abdication of King James, every step was taken that natural
justice and equity could require; and all was done that was possible at least
in the wretched state in which he left the nation. Those very noble and
worthy patriots, the lords spiritual and temporal of that day, and the
principal persons of the commons, advised the prince, who in consequence
thereof caused letters to be “written to the lords spiritual and temporal,
being protestants, and other letters to the several counties, cities,
universities, boroughs and cinque ports, for the choosing such persons to

represent them as were of right to be sent to parliament, to meet at
Westminster upon the 22d of January 1688, in order to such an
establishment, as that their religion, laws and liberties might not again be in
danger of being subverted.” See W & M. sess. 1. C. 1.
Upon this elections were made, and thereupon the said lords spiritual
and temporal and commons met, and proceeded to assert their rights and
liberties, and to the election of the Prince and Princess of Orange to be King
and Queen of England, France and Ireland, and the dominions thereto
belonging. The kingdom of Scotland agreed in the same choice: These
proceedings were drawn into the form of acts of parliament, and are the
basis of the acts of union and succession since made, and which all together
are the sure foundation of that indisputable right which his present Majesty
has to the Crown of Great-Britain and the dominions thereto belonging;
which right ’tis the greatest folly to doubt of, as well as the blackest treason
to deny. The present establishment founded on the law of GOD, and of
nature, was began by the convention, with a professed and real view, in all
parts of the British empire, to put the liberties of the people out of the reach
of arbitrary power in all times to come.
But the grandeur, as well as justice, equity and goodness of the
proceedings of the nation on that memorable occasion, never have been nor
can be so well represented as in the words of those great men who
composed the convention; for which reason partly, but principally because
they shew the rights of all British subjects, both at home and abroad, and
should therefore be in as many hands as possible, I have transcribed the
following clauses.
1 Wm. & M. sess. 1. Chap. 1 preamble & sec 1—entituled—
“An act for removing and preventing all questions and disputes
concerning the assembling and sitting of this present parliament.”

For preventing all doubts and scruples which may in any wise arise
concerning the meeting, sitting and proceeding of this present parliament;
be it declared and enacted by the King’s and Queen’s most excellent
Majesty’s, by and with the advice and consent of the lords spiritual and
temporal, and commons, now assembled, and by authority of the same:
IIdly. That the lords spiritual and temporal, and commons, convened at
Westminster, the two and twentieth day of January A. D. 1688, and there
sitting the 13th of February following, are the two houses of parliament,
and so shall be and are hereby declared, enacted and adjudged to be, to all
intents, constructions, and purposes whatsoever, notwithstanding any want
of writ or writs of summons, or any other defect of form or default
whatsoever, as if they had been summoned according to the usual form.
1 of W. & M. sess. 2. Chap. 2. sec. 3, 4, 5, 6, 11, 12.
“An act declaring the rights and liberties of the subject, and settling the
succession of the Crown.”
Whereas the lords spiritual and temporal, and commons, assembled at
Westminster, lawfully, fully and freely representing all the estates of the
people of this realm, did upon the 13th of February A.D. 1688, present unto
their Majesties, then called and known by the names and stile of William
and Mary, Prince and Princess of Orange, being present in their proper
persons, a certain declaration in writing, made by the said lords and
commons in the words following; viz.
Whereas the late King James the second, by the assistance of divers
evil counsellors, judges, and ministers employed by him, did endeavour to
subvert and extirpate the protestant religion, and the laws and liberties of
this kingdom.
1. By assuming and exercising a power of dispensing with and
suspending of laws, and the execution of laws, without consent of

parliament.
2. By committing and prosecuting divers worthy prelates, for humbly
petitioning to be excused from concuring to the said assumed power.
3. By issuing and causing to be executed a commission under the great
seal for erecting a court called, The court of commissioners for
ecclesiastical causes.
4. By levying money for and to the use of the crown, by pretence of
prerogative, for other time, and in other manner, than the same was granted
by parliament.
5. By raising and keeping a standing army within this kingdom in time
of peace, without consent of parliament, and quartering soldiers contrary to
law.
6. By causing several good subjects, being protestants, to be disarmed,
at the same time when papists were both armed and employed, contrary to
law.
7. By violating the freedom of election of members to serve in
parliament.
8. By prosecutions in the court of king’s bench, for matters and causes
cognizable only in parliament; and by divers other arbitrary and illegal
courses.
9. And whereas of late years, partial, corrupt and unqualified persons,
have been returned and served on juries in trials, and particularly divers
jurors in trials for high treason, which were not freeholders.
10. And excessive bail hath been required of persons committed in
criminal cases, to elude the benefit of the laws made for the liberty of the
subjects.
11. And excessive fines have been imposed; and illegal and cruel
punishments inflicted.

12. And several grants and promises made of fines and forfeitures,
before any conviction or judgment against the persons, upon whom the
same were to be levied.
All which are utterly and directly contrary to the known laws and
statutes, and freedom of this realm—
And whereas the said late King James the second having abdicated the
Government, and the throne being thereby vacant, his highness the prince of
Orange (whom it hath pleased Almighty GOD to make the glorious
instrument of delivering this kingdom from popery and arbitrary power) did
(by the advice of the Lords spiritual and temporal, and divers principal
persons of the commons) cause letters to be written to the lords spiritual and
temporal, being protestants, and other letters to the several counties, cities,
universities, boroughs, and cinque-ports, for the choosing of such persons to
represent them, as were of right to be sent to parliament, to meet and sit at
Westminster upon the two and twentieth of January in this year 1688, in
order to such an establishment, as that their religion, laws and liberties
might not again be in danger of being subverted. Upon which letters,
elections having been accordingly made:
And thereupon the said lords spiritual and temporal and commons,
pursuant to their respective letters and elections, being now assembled in a
full and free representative of this nation, taking into their most serious
consideration the best means for attaining the ends aforesaid; do in the first
place (as their ancestors in like case have usually done) for the vindicating
and asserting their ancient rights and liberties, declare,
1. That the pretended power of suspending of laws, or the execution of
laws, by regal authority, without consent of parliament, is illegal.
2. That the pretended power of dispensing with laws, or the execution
of laws, by regal authority, as it hath been assumed and exercised of late, is

illegal.
3. That the commission for creating the late court of commissioners for
ecclesiastical causes, and all other commissions and courts of like nature,
are illegal and pernicious.
4. That levying money for or to the use of the crown, by pretence of
prerogative, without grant of parliament, for longer time, or in other
manner, than the same is or shall be granted, is illegal.
5. That it is the right of the subjects to petition the King; and all
commitments and prosecutions for such petitioning are illegal.
6. That the raising or keeping a standing army within the kingdom in
time of peace, unless it be with consent of parliament, is against law.
7. That the subjects which are protestants, may have arms for their
defence, suitable to their conditions, and as allowed by law.
8. That election of members of parliament ought to be free.
9. That the freedom of speech, and debates, or proceedings in
parliament, ought not to be impeached or questioned in any court or place
out of parliament.
10. That excessive bail ought not to be required, nor excessive fines
imposed; nor cruel and unusual punishments inflicted.
11. That jurors ought to be duly impannelled and returned; and jurors
which pass upon mens trials for high treason, ought to be freeholders.
12. That all grants and promises of fines and forfeitures of particular
persons before conviction, are illegal and void.
13. And that for redress of all grievances, and for the amending,
strengthening, and preserving of the laws, parliaments ought to be held
frequently.
And they do claim, demand, and insist upon all and singular the
premises, as their undoubted rights and liberties; and that no declarations,

judgments, doings, or proceedings, to the prejudice of the people in any of
the said premises, ought in any wise to be drawn hereafter into consequence
or example:
To which demand of their rights they are particularly encouraged by
the declaration of his Highness the Prince of Orange, as being the only
means for obtaining a full redress and remedy therein—
Having therefore an entire confidence, that his said Highness the
Prince of Orange, will perfect the deliverance so far advanced by him, and
will still preserve them from the violation of their rights, which they have
here asserted, and from all other attempts upon their religion, rights and
liberties.
II. The said Lords spiritual and temporal, and commons assembled at
Westminster, do resolve that William & Mary Prince and Princess of
Orange be, and be declared, King and Queen of England, France and
Ireland, and the dominions thereunto belonging, to hold the crown and royal
dignity of the said kingdoms and dominions to them the said Prince and
Princess, during their lives, and the life of the survivor of them; and that the
sole and full exercise of the regal power be only in, and executed by the
said Prince of Orange, in the names of the said prince and princess, during
their joint lives; and after their deceases, the said crown and royal dignity of
the said kingdoms and dominions to be to the heirs of the body of the said
princess; and for default of such issue, to the princess Anne of Denmark,
and the heirs of her body; and for default of such issue, to the heirs of the
body of the said prince of Orange. And the Lords spiritual and temporal,
and commons, do pray the said prince and princess to accept the same
accordingly.
IV. Upon which their said Majesties did accept the crown and royal
dignity of the kingdom of England, France and Ireland, and the dominions

thereunto belonging, according to the resolutions and desire of the said
lords and commons, contained in the said declaration.
V. And thereupon their Majesties were pleased, that the said Lords
spiritual and temporal, and commons, being the two houses of parliament,
should continue to sit, and with their Majesties royal concurrence, make
effectual provision for the settlement of the religion, laws and liberties of
this kingdom; so that the same for the future might not be in danger again of
being subverted; to which the said lords spiritual and temporal, and
commons, did agree and proceed to act accordingly.
VI. Now in pursuance of the premises, the said lords spiritual and
temporal and commons, in parliament assembled, for the ratifying,
confirming and establishing the said declaration, and the articles, clauses,
matters and things therein contained, by the force of a law made in due
form by authority of parliament, do pray that it may be declared and
enacted, That all and singular the rights and liberties asserted and claimed
in the said declaration, are the true, ancient and indubitable rights and
liberties of the people of this kingdom, and so shall be esteemed, allowed,
adjudged, deemed, and taken to be; and that all and every the particulars
aforesaid, shall be firmly and strictly holden and observed, as they are
expressed in the said declaration; and all officers and ministers whatsoever
shall serve their Majesties and their successors according to the same in all
times to come.
XI. All which their Majesties are contented and pleased shall be
declared, enacted, and established by authority of this present parliament,
and shall stand remain and be the law of this realm for ever; and the same
are by their said Majesties, by and with the advice and consent of the Lords
spiritual and temporal, and commons, in parliament assembled, and by the
authority of the same, declared, enacted, and established accordingly.

XII. And be it further declared and enacted by the authority aforesaid,
that from and after this present session of parliament, no dispensation by
non obstante of or to any statute or any part thereof, shall be allowed; but
that the same shall be held void and of no effect, except a dispensation be
allowed in such statutes, and except in such cases as shall be specially
provided for by one or more bill or bills to be passed during this present
session of parliament.
12 & 13 of William 3d, Chap. 2. sec. 3 & 4.
“Whereas it is necessary that further provision be made for securing
our religion, laws and liberties, after the death of his Majesty and the
Princess Anne of Denmark, and in default of issue of the body of the said
Princess, and of his Majesty respectively; it is enacted,
That after the said limitation shall take effect, judges commissions be
made quamdiu se bene gesserint, and their salaries ascertained and
established; but upon the address of both houses parliament, it may be
lawful to remove them;
That no pardon under the great seal of England be pleaded to an
impeachment by the commons in parliament.
Whereas the laws of England are the birth-right of the people thereof,
and all the Kings and Queens, who shall ascend the throne of this realm,
ought to administer the government of the same according to the said laws,
and all their officers and ministers ought to serve them according to the
same; all the laws and statutes of this realm for securing the established
religion, and the rights and liberties of the people, and all other laws and
statutes now in force, are by his Majesty with the advice and consent of the
lords spiritual and temporal, and commons, ratified and confirmed.”
I shall close this introduction with a passage from Mr. Locke.

“Tho’, says he, in a constituted common wealth, standing upon its own
basis, and acting according to its own nature, that is, acting for the
preservation of the community, there can be but one supreme power which
is the legislative, to which all the rest are and must be subordinate; yet the
legislative being only a fiduciary power, to act for certain ends, there
remains still, “in the people, a supreme power to remove, or alter, the
legislative when they find the legislative act contrary to the trust reposed in
them.” For all power given, with trust for the attaining an end, being limited
by that end, whenever that end is manifestly neglected, or opposed, the trust
must necessarily be forfeited, and the power devolve into the hands of those
who gave it, who may place it anew where they shall think best, for their
safety and security. And thus the community perpetually retains a supreme
power of saving themselves from the attempts and designs of any body,
even of their legislators whenever they shall be so foolish, or so wicked, as
to lay and carry on designs against the liberties and properties of the
subject. For no man or society of men having a power to deliver up their
preservation or consequently the means of it to the absolute will and
arbitrary dominion of another; whenever any one shall go about to bring
them into such a slavish condition, they will always have a right to preserve
what they have not a power to part with; and to rid themselves of those who
invade this fundamental, sacred and unalterable law of self preservation, for
which they entered into society.
And thus the community may be said in this respect to be always the
supreme power, but not as considered under any form of government,
because this power of the people can never take place, till the government
be dissolved.” Locke on Government, B. II. C. 13.
This he says may be done, “from without by conquest; from within,
1st. When the legislative is altered. Which is often by the prince, but

sometimes by the whole legislative. As by invading the property of the
subject, and making themselves arbitrary disposers of the lives, liberties and
fortunes of the people; reducing them to slavery under arbitrary power, they
put themselves into a state of war with the people, who are thereupon
absolved from any further obedience, and are left to the common refuge
which GOD hath provided for all men, against force and violence.
Whensoever therefore, the legislative shall transgress this fundamental rule
of society; and either by ambition, fear, folly or corruption, endeavour to
gain themselves, or put into the hands of any other an absolute power over
the lives, liberties and estates of the people, by this breach of trust, they
forfeit the power the people had put into their hands for quite contrary ends,
and it devolves to the people, who have a right to resume their original
liberty, and by the establishment of a new legislative (such as they shall
think fit) provide for their own safety and security, which is the end for
which they are in society.” Idem Chap. 19.

OF COLONIES IN GENERAL.
THIS subject has never been very clearly and fully handled by any modern
writer, that I have had the good fortune to meet with; and to do it justice,
would require much greater abilities than I pretend to, and more leisure than
I ever expect will fall to my share. Even the English writers and lawyers,
have either intirely wav’d any consideration of the nature of Colonies, or
very lightly touched upon it, for the people of England never discovered
much concern for the prosperity of the Colonies, ’till the revolution; and
even now some of their great men and writers, by their discourses of, and
conduct towards them, consider them all rather as a parcel of little
insignificant conquered islands, than as a very extensive settlement on the
continent. Even their law-books and very dictionaries of law, in editions so

late as 1750, speak of the British plantations abroad as consisting chiefly of
islands; and they are reckoned up in some of them in this order—Jamaica,
Barbados, Virginia, Maryland, New-England, New-York, Carolina,
Bermudas. At the head of all these Islands (for there is no distinction made)
stands Jamaica, in truth a conquered island; and as such, this and all the
other little West-India islands deserve to be treated, for the conduct of their
inhabitants and proprietors with regard to the Northern Colonies: Divers of
these colonies are larger than all those islands together; and are well settled,
not as the common people of England foolishly imagine, with a compound
mongrel mixture of English, Indian and Negro, but with freeborn British
white subjects, whose loyalty has never yet been suspected.
There is a man now living, or but lately dead, who once was a
secretary of state; during whose wonderful conduct of national affairs,
without knowing whether Jamaica lay in the Mediterranean, the Baltic, or
in the Moon, letters were often received, directed to the Governor of the
island of New-England. Which island of New-England is a part of the
continent of North-America, comprehending two provinces and two
colonies; and according to the undoubted bounds of their charters,
containing more land than there is in the three kingdoms. But I must
confine myself to matters of more importance than detecting the
geographical blunders, or refuting the errors of dead, superannuated or any
otherwise stupified secretaries of state, who are now all out of place.
If I were to define the modern Colonists, I should say, they are the
noble discoverers and settlers of a new world; from whence as from an
endless source, wealth, and plenty, the means of power, grandeur and glory,
in a degree unknown to the hungry chiefs of former ages, have been
pouring into Europe for 300 years past: In return for which those Colonists
have received from the several states of Europe, except from Great-Britain,

only since the revolution, nothing but ill-usage, slavery and chains, as fast
as the riches of their own earning, could furnish the means of forging them.
A plantation or colony, is a settlement of subjects in a territory
disjoined or remote from the mother country, and may be made by private
adventurers or the public; but in both cases the Colonists are entitled to as
ample rights, liberties and priviledges as the subjects of the mother country
are, and in some respects to more.

OF THE NATURAL RIGHTS OF COLONISTS.
THOSE who expect to find any thing very satisfactory on this subject in
particular, or with regard to the law of nature in general, in the writings of
such authors as Grotius and Pufendorf, will find themselves much mistaken.
It is their constant practice to establish the matter of right on the matter of
fact: This the celebrated Rousseau expresly says of Grotius, and with the
same reason he might have added an hundred others. “The learned
researches into the laws of nature and nations are often nothing more than
the history of ancient abuses, so that it is a ridiculous infatuation to be too
fond of studying them.”7 “This was exactly the case with Grotius.”8 The
sentiments on this subject have therefore been chiefly drawn from the purer
fountains of one or two of our English writers, particularly from Mr. Locke,
to whom might be added a few of other nations; for I have seen but a few of
any country, and of all I have seen, there are not ten worth reading. Grotius
B. 3. C. 1. sec. 21. discoursing of confederates on unequal terms according
to his manner says, “to the inequality in question may be referred some of
those rights which are now called right of protection, right of patronage,
and a right termed mundiburgium; as also that which mother cities had over
their colonies among the Grecians. For as Thucydides says, those colonies
enjoyed the same rights of liberty with the other cities, but they owed a

reverence to the city whence they derived their origin, and were obliged to
render her respect and certain expressions of honor, so long as the colony
was well treated.” Grotius de jure belli, &c. B. 1. C. 3. 21.
“Hitherto also (says he) may be referred that separation which is made
when people by one consent, go to form colonies. For this is the original of
a new and independent state. They are not content to be slaves, but to enjoy
equal priviledges and freedom says Thucydides. And King Tullius in Dion.
Hali. says, we look upon it to be neither truth nor justice, that mother cities
ought of necessity and by the law of nature to rule over their colonies.” B.
2. C. 9. sec. 10.
“Colonies, says Pufendorf, are settled in different methods. For either
the colony continues a part of the common-wealth it was sent out from, or
else is obliged to pay a dutiful respect to the mother common-wealth, and to
be in readiness to defend and vindicate its honor, and so is united to it by a
sort of unequal confederacy, or lastly is erected into a separate
commonwealth, and assumes the same rights with the state it is descended
from.” Pufend. B. 8. C. 11. 6.
“Different common wealths may be formed out of one by common
consent, by sending out colonies in the manner usual in old Greece. For the
Romans afterwards when they sent a colony abroad, continued it under the
jurisdiction of the mother commonwealth, or greater country. But the
colonies planted by the Greeks, and after their method, constituted
particular commonwealths, which were obliged only to pay a kind of
deference and dutiful submission to the mother commonwealth.” Pufend. B.
8. C. 12. sec. 5.
From which passages tis manifest that these two great men only state
facts, and the opinions of others, without giving their own upon the subject:
And all that can be collected from those facts or opinions, is, that Greece

was more generous, and a better mother to her colonies than Rome. The
conduct of Rome towards her colonies and the corruptions and oppressions
tolerated in her provincial officers of all denominations, was one great
cause of the downfall of that proud republic.
Dr. Strahan says, “there is a great affinity between the British colonies
and those of the Spaniards and other nations, who have made settlements
among the Indians in those parts: For the grants made by our Kings, of
tracts of lands in that country, for the planting of colonies, and making
settlements therein, appear to have been made in imitation of grants made
by the Kings of Spain to the proprietors of lands in the Spanish colonies,
upon the very same conditions, and in consideration of the same services to
be performed by the grantees. So that the government of the Spanish
colonies and the rights of the proprietors of lands therein, depending chiefly
on the rules of civil and feudal law, as may be seen by the learned treatise of
Solorzanus, de indiarum jure, the knowledge of the said laws must be of
service likewise for determining any controversy that may arise touching
the duties or forfeitures of the proprietors of lands in our English colonies.”
Pref. to translat. of Domat.
With submission to so great an authority as Dr. Strahan, tis humbly
hoped that the British colonists do not hold their lands as well as liberties
by so slippery a tenure as do the Spaniards and French. The will of the
Prince is the only tenure by which they hold; and the government of the
Spanish and French settlements is in every respect despotic.
’Tis well known that the first American grants were by the Bulls of the
Popes. The Roman Pontiffs had for ages usurped the most abominable
power over princes: They granted away the kingdoms of the earth with as
little ceremony as a man would lease a sheep-cot. Now according to Dr.
Strahans’s logic, it may be inferred, that the canon law, and the Popes Bulls,

must be of service likewise, for determining any controversy that may arise,
touching the duties or forfeitures of the proprietors of lands in the British
colonies. And indeed it must be owned, if we were to judge of some late
proceedings9 by this rule, we must allow that they savor more of modern
Rome and the Inquisition, than of the common law of England and the
constitution of Great-Britain.
In order to form an idea of the natural rights of the Colonists, I
presume it will be granted that they are men, the common children of the
same Creator with their brethren of Great-Britain. Nature has placed all
such in a state of equality and perfect freedom, to act within the bounds of
the laws of nature and reason, without consulting the will or regarding the
humor, the passions or whims of any other man, unless they are formed into
a society or body politic. This it must be confessed is rather an abstract way
of considering men than agreeable to the real and general course of nature.
The truth is, as has been shown, men come into the world and into society
at the same instant. But this hinders not but that the natural and original
rights of each individual may be illustrated and explained in this way better
than in any other. We see here by the way a probability, that this abstract
consideration of men, which has its use in reasoning on the principles of
government, has insensibly led some of the greatest men to imagine, some
real general state of nature, agreeable to this abstract conception, antecedent
to and independent of society. This is certainly not the case in general, for
most men become members of society from their birth, tho’ seperate
independent states are really in the condition of perfect freedom and
equality with regard to each other; and so are any number of individuals
who separate themselves from a society of which they have formerly been
members, for ill treatment, or other good cause, with express design to
found another. If in such case, there is a real interval, between the

separation and the new conjunction, during such interval, the individuals
are as much detached, and under the law of nature only, as would be two
men who should chance to meet on a desolate island.
The Colonists are by the law of nature free born, as indeed all men are,
white or black. No better reasons can be given, for enslaving those of any
color than such as baron Montesquieu has humorously given, as the
foundation of that cruel slavery exercised over the poor Ethiopians; which
threatens one day to reduce both Europe and America to the ignorance and
barbarity of the darkest ages. Does it follow that tis right to enslave a man
because he is black? Will short curl’d hair like wool, instead of christian
hair, as tis called by those, whose hearts, are as hard as the nether millstone,
help the argument? Can any logical inference in favour of slavery, be drawn
from a flat nose, a long or a short face? Nothing better can be said in favor
of a trade, that is the most shocking violation of the law of nature, has a
direct tendency to diminish the idea of the inestimable value of liberty, and
makes every dealer in it a tyrant, from the director of an African company
to the petty chapman in needles and pins on the unhappy coast. It is a clear
truth, that those who every day barter away other mens liberty, will soon
care little for their own. To this cause must be imputed that ferosity, cruelty
and brutal barbarity that has long marked the general character of the sugarislanders. They can in general form no idea of government but that which in
person, or by an overseer, the joint and several proper representative of a
Creole,10 and of the D——l, is exercised over ten thousands of their fellow
men, born with the same right to freedom, and the sweet enjoyments of
liberty and life, as their unrelenting task-masters, the overseers and planters.
Is it to be wondered at, if, when people of the stamp of a Creolian
planter get into power, they will not stick for a little present gain, at making

their own posterity, white as well as black, worse slaves if possible than
those already mentioned.
There is nothing more evident says Mr. Locke, than “that creatures of
the same species and rank promiscuously born to all the same advantages of
nature, and the use of the same faculties, should also be equal one among
another, without subordination and subjection, unless the master of them all
should by any manifest declaration of his will set one above another, and
confer on him by an evident and clear appointment, an undoubted right to
dominion and sovereignty.” “The natural liberty of man is to be free from
any superior power on earth, and not to be under the will or legislative
authority of man, but only to have the law of nature for his rule.” This is the
liberty of independant states; this is the liberty of every man out of society,
and who has a mind to live so; which liberty is only abridged in certain
instances, not lost to those who are born in or voluntarily enter into society;
this gift of God cannot be annihilated.
The Colonists being men, have a right to be considered as equally
entitled to all the rights of nature with the Europeans, and they are not to be
restrained, in the exercise of any of these rights, but for the evident good of
the whole community.
By being or becoming members of society, they have not renounced
their natural liberty in any greater degree than other good citizens, and if tis
taken from them without their consent, they are so far enslaved.
They have an undoubted right to expect, that their best good will ever
be consulted by their rulers, supreme and subordinate, without any partial
views confined to the particular interest of one island or another. Neither the
riches of Jamaica, nor the luxury of a metropolis, should ever have weight
enough to break the balance of truth and justice. Truth and faith belong to
men as men, from men, and if they are disappointed in their just

expectations of them in one society, they will at least wish for them in
another. If the love of truth and justice, the only spring of sound policy in
any state, is not strong enough to prevent certain causes from taking place,
the arts of fraud and force will not prevent the most fatal effects.
In the long run, those who fall on arbitrary measures, will meet with
their deserved fate. The law of nature, was not of man’s making, nor is it in
his power to mend it, or alter its course. He can only perform and keep, or
disobey and break it. The last is never done with impunity, even in this life,
if it is any punishment for a man to feel himself depraved; to find himself
degraded by his own folly and wickedness from the rank of a virtuous and
good man, to that of a brute; or to be transformed from the friend, perhaps
father of his country, to a devouring Lion or Tyger.
The unhappy revolutions which for ages have distressed the human
race, have been all owing to the want of a little wisdom, common sense and
integrity, in the administration of those, whom by their stations, God had in
kindness to the world, rendered able to do a great deal, for the benefit of
mankind, with the exertion of a small portion of private and public vertue.

OF THE POLITICAL AND CIVIL RIGHTS OF THE
BRITISH COLONISTS.
HERE indeed opens to view a large field; but I must study brevity—Few
people have extended their enquiries after the foundation of any of their
rights, beyond a charter from the crown. There are others who think when
they have got back to old Magna Charta, that they are at the beginning of
all things. They imagine themselves on the borders of Chaos (and so indeed
in some respects they are) and see creation rising out of the unformed mass,
or from nothing. Hence, say they, spring all the rights of men and of
citizens.—But liberty was better understood, and more fully enjoyed by our

ancestors, before the coming in of the first Norman Tyrants than ever after,
’till it was found necessary, for the salvation of the kingdom, to combat the
arbitrary and wicked proceedings of the Stuarts.
The present happy and most righteous establishment is justly built on
the ruins, which those Princes bro’t on their Family; and two of them on
their own heads—The last of the name sacrificed three of the finest
kingdoms in Europe, to the councils of bigotted old women, priests, and
more weak and wicked ministers of state: He afterward went a grazing in
the fields of St. Germains, and there died in disgrace and poverty, a terrible
example of God’s vengeance on arbitrary princes!
The deliverance under God wrought by the prince of Orange,
afterwards deservedly made King Wm. 3d. was as joyful an event to the
colonies as to Great-Britain: In some of them, steps were taken in his favour
as soon as in England.
They all immediately acknowledged King William and Queen Mary as
their lawful Sovereign. And such has been the zeal and loyalty of the
colonies ever since for that establishment, and for the protestant succession
in his present Majesty’s illustrious family, that I believe there is not one
man in an hundred (except in Canada) who does not think himself under the
best national civil constitution in the world.
Their loyalty has been abundantly proved, especially in the late war.
Their affection and reverence for their mother country is unquestionable.
They yield the most chearful and ready obedience to her laws, particularly
to the power of that august body the parliament of Great-Britain, the
supreme legislative of the kingdom and its dominions. These I declare are
my own sentiments of duty and loyalty. I also hold it clear that the act of
Queen Anne, which makes it high treason to deny “that the King with and
by the authority of parliament, is able to make laws and statutes of

sufficient force and validity to limit and bind the crown, and the descent,
limitation, inheritance and government thereof” is founded on the principles
of liberty and the British constitution: And he that would palm the doctrine
of unlimited passive obedience and non-resistance upon mankind, and
thereby or by any other means serve the cause of the Pretender, is not only a
fool and a knave, but a rebel against common sense, as well as the laws of
God, of Nature, and his Country.
— I also lay it down as one of the first principles from whence I
intend to deduce the civil rights of the British colonies, that all of them are
subject to, and dependent on Great-Britain; and that therefore as over
subordinate governments, the parliament of Great-Britain has an undoubted
power and lawful authority to make acts for the general good, that by
naming them, shall and ought to be equally binding, as upon the subjects of
Great-Britain within the realm. This principle, I presume will be readily
granted on the other side the atlantic. It has been practiced upon for twenty
years to my knowledge, in the province of the Massachusetts-Bay; and I
have ever received it, that it has been so from the beginning, in this and the
sister provinces, thro’ the continent.11
I am aware, some will think it is time for me to retreat, after having
expressed the power of the British parliament in quite so strong terms. But
’tis from and under this very power and its acts, and from the common law,
that the political and civil rights of the Colonists are derived: And upon
those grand pillars of liberty shall my defence be rested. At present
therefore, the reader may suppose, that there is not one provincial charter on
the continent; he may, if he pleases, imagine all taken away, without fault,
without forfeiture, without tryal or notice. All this really happened to some
of them in the last century. I would have the reader carry his imagination
still further, and suppose a time may come, when instead of a process at

common law, the parliament shall give a decisive blow to every charter in
America, and declare them all void. Nay it shall also be granted, that ’tis
barely possible, the time may come, when the real interest of the whole may
require an act of parliament to annihilate all those charters. What could
follow from all this, that would shake one of the essential, natural, civil or
religious rights of the Colonists? Nothing. They would be men, citizens and
british subjects after all. No act of parliament can deprive them of the
liberties of such, unless any will contend that an act of parliament can make
slaves not only of one, but of two millions of the commonwealth. And if so,
why not of the whole? I freely own, that I can find nothing in the laws of
my country, that would justify the parliament in making one slave, nor did
they ever professedly undertake to make one.
Two or three innocent colony charters have been threatened with
destruction an hundred and forty years past. I wish the present enemies of
those harmless charters would reflect a moment, and be convinced that an
act of parliament that should demolish those bugbears to the foes of liberty,
would not reduce the Colonists to a state of absolute slavery. The worst
enemies of the charter governments are by no means to be found in
England. ’Tis a piece of justice due to Great-Britain to own, they are and
have ever been natives of or residents in the colonies. A set of men in
America, without honour or love to their country, have been long grasping
at powers, which they think unattainable while these charters stand in the
way. But they will meet with insurmountable obstacles to their project for
enslaving the British colonies, should those, arising from provincial charters
be removed. It would indeed seem very hard and severe, for those of the
colonists, who have charters, with peculiar priviledges, to loose them. They
were given to their ancestors, in consideration of their sufferings and merit,
in discovering and settling America. Our fore-fathers were soon worn away

in the toils of hard labour on their little plantations, and in war with the
Savages. They thought they were earning a sure inheritance for their
posterity. Could they imagine it would ever be tho’t just to deprive them or
theirs of their charter priviledges! Should this ever be the case, there are,
thank God, natural, inherent and inseperable rights as men, and as citizens,
that would remain after the so much wished for catastrophe, and which,
whatever became of charters, can never be abolished de jure, if de facto, till
the general conflagation.12 Our rights as men and free born British subjects,
give all the Colonists enough to make them very happy in comparison with
the subjects of any other prince in the world.
Every British subject born on the continent of America, or in any other
of the British dominions, is by the law of God and nature, by the common
law, and by act of parliament, (exclusive of all charters from the Crown)
entitled to all the natural, essential, inherent and inseparable rights of our
fellow subjects in Great-Britain. Among those rights are the following,
which it is humbly conceived no man or body of men, not excepting the
parliament, justly, equitably and consistently with their own rights and the
constitution, can take away.
1st. That the supreme and subordinate powers of legislation should be
free and sacred in the hands where the community have once rightfully
placed them.
2dly. The supreme national legislative cannot be altered justly ’till the
commonwealth is dissolved, nor a subordinate legislative taken away
without forfeiture or other good cause. Nor then can the subjects in the
subordinate government be reduced to a state of slavery, and subject to the
despotic rule of others. A state has no right to make slaves of the
conquered. Even when the subordinate right of legislature is forfeited, and
so declared, this cannot affect the natural persons either of those who were

invested with it, or the inhabitants,13 so far as to deprive them of the rights
of subjects and of men—The colonists will have an equitable right
notwithstanding any such forfeiture of charter, to be represented in
Parliament, or to have some new subordinate legislature among themselves.
It would be best if they had both. Deprived however of their common rights
as subjects, they cannot lawfully be, while they remain such. A
representation in Parliament from the several Colonies, since they are
become so large and numerous, as to be called on not to maintain provincial
government, civil and military among themselves, for this they have
chearfully done, but to contribute towards the support of a national standing
army, by reason of the heavy national debt, when they themselves owe a
large one, contracted in the common cause, can’t be tho’t an unreasonable
thing, nor if asked, could it be called an immodest request. Qui sentit
commodum sentire debet et onus, has been tho’t a maxim of equity. But that
a man should bear a burthen for other people, as well as himself, without a
return, never long found a place in any law-book or decrees, but those of
the most despotic princes. Besides the equity of an American representation
in parliament, a thousand advantages would result from it. It would be the
most effectual means of giving those of both countries a thorough
knowledge of each others interests; as well as that of the whole, which are
inseparable.
Were this representation allowed; instead of the scandalous memorials
and depositions that have been sometimes, in days of old, privately cooked
up in an inquisitorial manner, by persons of bad minds and wicked views,
and sent from America to the several boards, persons of the first reputation
among their countrymen, might be on the spot, from the several colonies,
truly to represent them. Future ministers need not, like some of their
predecessors, have recourse for information in American affairs, to every

vagabond stroller, that has run or rid post thro’ America, from his creditors,
or to people of no kind of reputation from the colonies; some of whom, at
the time of administring their sage advice, have been as ignorant of the state
of this country, as of the regions in Jupiter and Saturn.
No representation of the Colonies in parliament alone, would however
be equivalent to a subordinate legislative among themselves; nor so well
answer the ends of increasing their prosperity and the commerce of GreatBritain. It would be impossible for the parliament to judge so well, of their
abilities to bear taxes, impositions on trade, and other duties and burthens,
or of the local laws that might be really needful, as a legislative here.
3dly. No legislative, supreme or subordinate, has a right to make itself
arbitrary.
It would be a most manifest contradiction, for a free legislative, like
that of Great-Britain, to make itself arbitrary.
4thly. The supreme legislative cannot justly assume a power of ruling
by extempore arbitrary decrees, but is bound to dispense justice by known
settled rules, and by duly authorized independant judges.
5thly. The supreme power cannot take from any man any part of his
property, without his consent in person, or by representation.
6thly. The legislature cannot transfer the power of making laws to any
other hands.
These are their bounds, which by God and nature are fixed, hitherto
have they a right to come, and no further.
1. To govern by stated laws.
2. Those laws should have no other end ultimately, but the good of the
people.
3. Taxes are not to be laid on the people, but by their consent in
person, or by deputation.

4. Their whole power is not transferable.14
These are the first principles of law and justice, and the great barriers
of a free state, and of the British constitution in particular. I ask, I want no
more—Now let it be shown how ’tis reconcileable with these principles, or
to many other fundamental maxims of the British constitution, as well as
the natural and civil rights, which by the laws of their country, all British
subjects are intitled to, as their best inheritance and birth-right, that all the
northern colonies, who are without one representative in the house of
Commons, should be taxed by the British parliament.
That the colonists, black and white, born here, are free born British
subjects, and entitled to all the essential civil rights of such, is a truth not
only manifest from the provincial charters, from the principles of the
common law, and acts of parliament; but from the British constitution,
which was re-established at the revolution, with a professed design to
secure the liberties of all the subjects to all generations.15
In the 12 and 13 of Wm. cited above, the liberties of the subject are
spoken of as their best birth-rights—No one ever dreamt, surely, that these
liberties were confined to the realm. At that rate, no British subjects in the
dominions could, without a manifest contradiction, be declared entitled to
all the privileges of subjects born within the realm, to all intents and
purposes, which are rightly given foreigners, by parliament, after residing
seven years. These expressions of parliament, as well as of the charters,
must be vain and empty sounds, unless we are allowed the essential rights
of our fellow-subjects in Great-Britain.
Now can there be any liberty, where property is taken away without
consent? Can it with any colour of truth, justice or equity, be affirmed, that
the northern colonies are represented in parliament? Has this whole
continent of near three thousand miles in length, and in which and his other

American dominions, his Majesty has, or very soon will have, some
millions of as good, loyal and useful subjects, white and black, as any in the
three kingdoms, the election of one member of the house of commons?
Is there the least difference, as to the consent of the Colonists, whether
taxes and impositions are laid on their trade, and other property, by the
crown alone, or by the parliament? As it is agreed on all hands, the Crown
alone cannot impose them, we should be justifiable in refusing to pay them,
but must and ought to yield obedience to an act of parliament, tho’
erroneous, ’till repealed.
I can see no reason to doubt, but that the imposition of taxes, whether
on trade, or on land, or houses, or ships, on real or personal, fixed or
floating property, in the colonies, is absolutely irreconcileable with the
rights of the Colonists, as British subjects, and as men. I say men, for in a
state of nature, no man can take my property from me, without my consent:
If he does, he deprives me of my liberty, and makes me a slave. If such a
proceeding is a breach of the law of nature, no law of society can make it
just—The very act of taxing, exercised over those who are not represented,
appears to me to be depriving them of one of their most essential rights, as
freemen; and if continued, seems to be in effect an entire disfranchisement
of every civil right. For what one civil right is worth a rush, after a man’s
property is subject to be taken from him at pleasure, without his consent. If
a man is not his own assessor in person, or by deputy, his liberty is gone, or
lays intirely at the mercy of others.
I think I have heard it said, that when the Dutch are asked why they
enslave their colonies, their answer is, that the liberty of Dutchmen is
confined to Holland; and that it was never intended for Provincials in
America, or any where else. A sentiment this, very worthy of modern
Dutchmen; but if their brave and worthy ancestors had entertained such

narrow ideas of liberty, seven poor and distressed provinces would never
have asserted their rights against the whole Spanish monarchy, of which the
present is but a shadow. It is to be hoped, none of our fellow subjects of
Britain, great or small, have borrowed this Dutch maxim of plantation
politics; if they have, they had better return it from whence it came; indeed
they had. Modern Dutch or French maxims of state, never will suit with a
British constitution. It is a maxim, that the King can do no wrong; and
every good subject is bound to believe his King is not inclined to do any.
We are blessed with a prince who has given abundant demonstrations, that
in all his actions, he studies the good of his people, and the true glory of his
crown, which are inseparable. It would therefore, be the highest degree of
impudence and disloyalty to imagine that the King, at the head of his
parliament, could have any, but the most pure and perfect intentions of
justice, goodness and truth, that human nature is capable of. All this I say
and believe of the King and parliament, in all their acts; even in that which
so nearly affects the interest of the colonists; and that a most perfect and
ready obedience is to be yielded to it, while it remains in force. I will go
further, and readily admit, that the intention of the ministry was not only to
promote the public good, by this act; but that Mr. Chancellor of the
Exchequer had therein a particular view to the “ease, the quiet, and the good
will of the Colonies,” he having made this declaration more than once. Yet I
hold that ’tis possible he may have erred in his kind intentions towards the
Colonies, and taken away our fish, and given us a stone. With regard to the
parliament, as infallability belongs not to mortals, ’tis possible they may
have been misinformed and deceived. The power of parliament is
uncontroulable, but by themselves, and we must obey. They only can repeal
their own acts. There would be an end of all government, if one or a number
of subjects or subordinate provinces should take upon them so far to judge

of the justice of an act of parliament, as to refuse obedience to it. If there
was nothing else to restrain such a step, prudence ought to do it, for
forceably resisting the parliament and the King’s laws, is high treason.
Therefore let the parliament lay what burthens they please on us, we must,
it is our duty to submit and patiently bear them, till they will be pleased to
relieve us. And tis to be presumed, the wisdom and justice of that august
assembly, always will afford us relief by repealing such acts, as through
mistake, or other human infirmities, have been suffered to pass, if they can
be convinced that their proceedings are not constitutional, or not for the
common good.
The parliament may be deceived, they may have been misinformed of
facts, and the colonies may in many respects be misrepresented to the King,
his parliament, and his ministry. In some instances, I am well assured the
colonies have been very strangely misrepresented in England. I have now
before me a pamphlet, called the “administration of the colonies,” said to be
written by a gentleman who formerly commanded in chief in one of them. I
suppose this book was designed for public information and use. There are in
it many good regulations proposed, which no power can enforce but the
parliament. From all which I infer, that if our hands are tied by the passing
of an act of parliament, our mouths are not stoped, provided we speak of
that transcendent body with decency, as I have endeavoured always to do;
and should any thing have escaped me, or hereafter fall from my pen, that
bears the least aspect but that of obedience, duty and loyalty to the King &
parliament, and the highest respect for the ministry, the candid will impute
it to the agony of my heart, rather than to the pravity of my will. If I have
one ambitious wish, ’tis to see Great-Britain at the head of the world, and to
see my King, under God, the father of mankind. I pretend neither to the
spirit of prophecy, nor any uncommon skill in predicting a Crisis, much less

to tell when it begins to be “nascent” or is fairly midwiv’d into the world.
But if I were to fix a meaning to the two first paragraphs of the
administration of the colonies, tho’ I do not collect it from them, I should
say the world was at the eve of the highest scene of earthly power and
grandeur that has been ever yet displayed to the view of mankind. The cards
are shuffling fast thro’ all Europe. Who will win the prize is with God. This
however I know, detur digniori. The next universal monarchy will be
favourable to the human race, for it must be founded on the principles of
equity, moderation and justice. No country has been more distinguished for
these principles than Great-Britain, since the revolution. I take it, every
subject has a right to give his sentiments to the public, of the utility or
inutility of any act whatsoever, even after it is passed, as well as while it is
pending.—The equity and justice of a bill may be questioned, with perfect
submission to the legislature. Reasons may be given, why an act ought to be
repeal’d, & yet obedience must be yielded to it till that repeal takes place. If
the reasons that can be given against an act, are such as plainly demonstrate
that it is against natural equity, the executive courts will adjudge such act
void. It may be questioned by some, tho’ I make no doubt of it, whether
they are not obliged by their oaths to adjudge such act void. If there is not a
right of private judgment to be exercised, so far at least as to petition for a
repeal, or to determine the expediency of risking a trial at law, the
parliament might make itself arbitrary, which it is conceived it can not by
the constitution.—I think every man has a right to examine as freely into
the origin, spring and foundation of every power and measure in a
commonwealth, as into a piece of curious machinery, or a remarkable
phenomenon in nature; and that it ought to give no more offence to say, the
parliament have erred, or are mistaken, in a matter of fact or of right, than
to say it of a private man, if it is true of both. If the assertion can be proved

with regard to either, it is a kindness done them to show them the truth.
With regard to the public, it is the duty of every good citizen to point out
what he thinks erroneous in the commonwealth.
I have waited years in hopes to see some one friend of the colonies
pleading in publick for them. I have waited in vain. One priviledge is taken
away after another, and where we shall be landed, God knows, and I trust
will protect and provide for us even should we be driven and persecuted
into a more western wilderness, on the score of liberty, civil and religious,
as many of our ancestors were, to these once inhospitable shores of
America. I had formed great expectations from a gentleman, who published
his first volume in quarto on the rights of the colonies two years since; but,
as he foresaw, the state of his health and affairs have prevented his further
progress. The misfortune is, gentlemen in America, the best qualified in
every respect to state the rights of the colonists, have reasons that prevent
them from engaging: Some of them have good ones. There are many
infinitely better able to serve this cause than I pretend to be; but from
indolence, from timidity, or by necessary engagements, they are prevented.
There has been a most profound, and I think shameful silence, till it seems
almost too late to assert our indisputable rights as men and as citizens. What
must posterity think of us. The trade of the whole continent taxed by
parliament, stamps and other internal duties and taxes as they are called,
talked of, and not one petition to the King and Parliament for relief.
I cannot but observe here, that if the parliament have an equitable right
to tax our trade, ’tis indisputable that they have as good an one to tax the
lands, and every thing else. The taxing trade furnishes one reason why the
other should be taxed, or else the burdens of the province will be unequally
born, upon a supposition that a tax on trade is not a tax on the whole. But
take it either way, there is no foundation for the distinction some make in

England, between an internal and an external tax on the colonies. By the
first is meant a tax on trade, by the latter a tax on land, and the things on it.
A tax on trade is either a tax of every man in the province, or ’tis not. If ’tis
not a tax on the whole, ’tis unequal and unjust, that a heavy burden should
be laid on the trade of the colonies, to maintain an army of soldiers, customhouse officers, and fleets of guard-ships; all which, the incomes of both
trade and land would not furnish means to support so lately as the last war,
when all was at stake, and the colonies were reimbursed in part by
parliament. How can it be supposed that all of a sudden the trade of the
colonies alone can bear all this terrible burden. The late acquisitions in
America, as glorious as they have been, and as beneficial as they are to
Great-Britain, are only a security to these colonies against the ravages of the
French and Indians. Our trade upon the whole is not, I believe, benefited by
them one groat. All the time the French Islands were in our hands, the fine
sugars, &c. were all shipped home. None as I have been informed were
allowed to be bro’t to the colonies. They were too delicious a morsel for a
North American palate. If it be said that a tax on the trade of the colonies is
an equal and just tax on the whole of the inhabitants: What then becomes of
the notable distinction between external and internal taxes? Why may not
the parliament lay stamps, land taxes, establish tythes to the church of
England, and so indefinitely. I know of no bounds. I do not mention the
tythes out of any disrespect to the church of England, which I esteem by far
the best national church, and to have had as ornaments of it many of the
greatest and best men in the world. But to those colonies who in general
dissent from a principle of conscience, it would seem a little hard to pay
towards the support of a worship, whose modes they cannot conform to.
If an army must be kept up in America, at the expence of the colonies,
it would not seem quite so hard if after the parliament had determined the

sum to be raised, and apportioned it, to have allowed each colony to assess
its quota, and raise it as easily to themselves as might be. But to have the
whole levied and collected without our consent is extraordinary. ’Tis
allowed even to tributaries, and those laid under military contribution, to
assess and collect the sums demanded. The case of the provinces is
certainly likely to be the hardest that can be instanced in story. Will it not
equal any thing but down right military execution? Was there ever a tribute
imposed even on the conquered? A fleet, an army of soldiers, and another
of tax-gatherers kept up, and not a single office either for securing or
collecting the duty in the gift of the tributary state.
I am aware it will be objected, that the parliament of England, and of
Great Britain, since the union, have from early days to this time, made acts
to bind if not to tax Ireland: I answer, Ireland is a conquered country. I do
not, however, lay so much stress on this; for it is my opinion, that a
conquered country has, upon submission and good behaviour, the same
right to be free, under a conqueror, as the rest of his subjects. But the old
notion of the right of conquest, has been, in most nations, the cause of many
severities and heinous breaches of the law of nature: If any such have taken
place with regard to Ireland, they should form no precedent for the
colonies. The subordination and dependency of Ireland to Great Britain, is
expresly declared by act of parliament, in the reign of G. 1st. The
subordination of the Colonies to Great Britain, never was doubted, by a
Lawyer, if at all; unless perhaps by the author of the administration of the
colonies: He indeed seems to make a moot point of it, whether the colony
legislative power is as independent “as the legislative Great Britain holds by
its constitution, and under the great charter.”—The people hold under the
great charter, as ’tis vulgarly expressed from our law-books: But that the
King and parliament should be said to hold under Magna Charta, is as new

to me, as it is to question whether the colonies are subordinate to Great
Britain. The provincial legislative is unquestionably subordinate to that of
Great Britain. I shall endeavour more fully to explain the nature of that
subordination, which has puzzled so many in their enquiries. It is often very
difficult for great lovers of power, and great lovers of liberty, neither of
whom may have been used to the study of law, in any of its branches, to see
the difference between subordination, absolute slavery and subjection, on
one side; and liberty, independence and licenciousness, on the other. We
should endeavour to find the middle road, and confine ourselves to it. The
laws, the proceedings of parliament, and the decisions of the judges,
relating to Ireland, will reflect light on this subject, rendered intricate only
by art.
“Ireland being of itself a distinct dominion, and no part of the kingdom
of England (as it directly appeareth by many authorities in Calvin’s case)
was to have PARLIAMENTS holden there as in England.” 4 Inst. 349.
Why should not the colonies have, why are they not entitled to their
assemblies, or parliaments, at least, as well as a conquered dominion?
“Wales, after the conquest of it, by Edward the first, was annexed to
England, jure proprietatis, 12 Ed. I by the statute of Rutland only, and after,
more really by 27 H. 8. and 34, but at first received laws from England, as
Ireland did; but writs proceeded not out of the English chancery, but they
had a Chancery of their own, as Ireland hath; was not bound by the laws of
England, unnamed until 27 H. 8. no more than Ireland is.
Ireland in nothing differs from it, but having a parliament gratia Regis
(i. e. upon the old notion of conquest) subject (truly however) to the
parliament of England. None doubts Ireland as much conquered as it; and
as much subject to the parliament of England, if it please.” Vaughan. 300.

A very strong argument arises from this authority, in favour of the
unconquered plantations. If since Wales was annexed to England, they have
had a representation in parliament, as they have to this day; and if the
parliament of England does not tax Ireland, can it be right they should tax
us, who have never been conquered, but came from England to colonize,
and have always remained good subjects to this day?
I cannot find any instance of a tax laid by the English parliament on
Ireland. “Sometimes the King of England called his Nobles of Ireland, to
come to his parliament of England, &c. and by special words, the
parliament of England may bind the subjects of Ireland”—4 Inst. 350.—
The following makes it clear to me, the parliament of Great Britain do
not tax Ireland. “The parliament of Ireland having been prorogued to the
month of August next, before they had provided for the maintenance of the
government in that kingdom, a project was set on foot here to supply that
defect, by retrenching the drawbacks upon goods exported thither from
England. According to this scheme, the 22d, the house in a grand
committee, considered the present laws with respect to drawbacks upon
tobaccoes, muslins, and East India silks, carried to Ireland; and came to two
resolutions, which were reported the next day, and with an amendment to
one of them agreed to by the house, as follows, Viz. 1. That three pence pr
pound, part of the drawback on tobacco to be exported from Great Britain
for Ireland, be taken off.
2. That the said diminution of the drawback do take effect upon all
tobacco exported for Ireland, after the 24 of March 1713, and continue until
the additional duty of three pence half penny per pound upon tobacco in
Ireland, expiring on the said 24th of March, be regranted: And ordered a
bill to be brought in, upon the said resolutions.” Proceedings of House of
Commons, Vol. 5. 72.

This was constitutional; there is an infinite difference between taking
off British drawbacks, and imposing Irish or other Provincial duties.
“Ireland is considered as a provincial government, subordinate to, but
no part of the Realm of England,” Mich. II. G. 2. in case of Otway and
Ramsay— “Acts of parliament made here, (i. e. in England) extend not to
Ireland, unless particularly named; much less judgments obtained in the
courts here; nor is it possible they should, because we have no officers to
carry them into execution there.” ib.
The first part seems to be applicable to the plantations in general, the
latter is not; for by reason of charter reservations and particular acts of
parliament, some judgments in England may be executed here, as final
judgments, before his Majesty in council on a plantation appeal, and so
from the admiralty.
It seems to have been disputed in Ireland, so lately as the 6 Geo. 1.
Whether any act of the British parliament bound Ireland; or at least it was
apprehended, that the undoubted right of the British parliament to bind
Ireland, was in danger of being shaken: This, I presume, occasioned the act
of that year, which declares, that “the kingdom of Ireland ought to be
subordinate unto and dependent upon the Imperial Crown of Great Britain,
as being inseparably united thereto. And the King’s Majesty, with the
consent of the lords and commons of Great Britain in parliament, hath
power to make laws to bind the people of Ireland.”—This parliamentary
power must have some bounds, even as to Ireland, as well as the colonies,
who are admitted to be subordinate ab initio to Great Britain; not as
conquered, but as emigrant subjects. If this act should be said to be a
declaration not only of the general, but of the universal power of
parliament, and that they may tax Ireland, I ask, Why it has never been
done? If it had been done a thousand times, it would be a contradiction to

the principles of a free government; and what is worse, destroy all
subordination consistent with freedom, and reduce the people to slavery.
To say the parliament is absolute and arbitrary, is a contradiction. The
parliament cannot make 2 and 2, 5: Omnipotency cannot do it. The supreme
power in a state, is jus dicere only:—jus dare, strictly speaking, belongs
alone to GOD. Parliaments are in all cases to declare what is for the good of
the whole; but it is not the declaration of parliament that makes it so: There
must be in every instance, a higher authority, viz. GOD. Should an act of
parliament be against any of his natural laws, which are immutably true,
their declaration would be contrary to eternal truth, equity and justice, and
consequently void: and so it would be adjudged by the parliament itself,
when convinced of their mistake. Upon this great principle, parliaments
repeal such acts, as soon as they find they have been mistaken, in having
declared them to be for the public good, when in fact they were not so.
When such mistake is evident and palpable, as in the instances in the
appendix, the judges of the executive courts have declared the act “of a
whole parliament void.” See here the grandeur of the British constitution!
See the wisdom of our ancestors! The supreme legislative, and the supreme
executive, are a perpetual check and balance to each other. If the supreme
executive errs, it is informed by the supreme legislative in parliament: If the
supreme legislative errs, it is informed by the supreme executive in the
King’s courts of law.—Here, the King appears, as represented by his judges,
in the highest lustre and majesty, as supreme executor of the
commonwealth; and he never shines brighter, but on his Throne, at the head
of the supreme legislative. This is government! This, is a constitution! to
preserve which, either from foreign or domestic foes, has cost oceans of
blood and treasure in every age; and the blood and the treasure have upon
the whole been well spent. British America, hath been bleeding in this

cause from its settlement: We have spent all we could raise, and more; for
notwithstanding the parliamentary reimbursements of part, we still remain
much in debt. The province of the Massachusetts, I believe, has expended
more men and money in war since the year 1620, when a few families first
landed at Plymouth, in proportion to their ability, than the three Kingdoms
together. The same, I believe, may be truly affirmed, of many of the other
colonies; tho’ the Massachusetts has undoubtedly had the heaviest burthen.
This may be thought incredible: but materials are collecting; and tho’ some
are lost, enough may remain, to demonstrate it to the world. I have reason to
hope at least, that the public will soon see such proofs exhibited, as will
show, that I do not speak quite at random.
Why then is it thought so heinous by the author of the administration
of the colonies, and others, that the colonists should aspire after “a one
whole legislative power” not independent of, but subordinate to the laws
and parliament of Great-Britain?—It is a mistake in this author, to bring so
heavy a charge as high treason against some of the colonists, which he does
in effect in this place,16 by representing them as “claiming in fact or indeed,
the same full free independent unrestrained power and legislative will, in
their several corporations, and under the King’s commission, and their
respective charters, as the government and legislature of Great-Britain holds
by its constitution and under the great charter.” No such claim was ever
tho’t of by any of the colonists. They are all better men and better subjects;
and many of them too well versed in the laws of nature and nations, and the
law and constitution of Great-Britain, to think they have a right to more
than a provincial subordinate legislative. All power is of GOD. Next and
only subordinate to him, in the present state of the well-formed, beautifully
constructed British monarchy, standing where I hope it ever will stand, for
the pillars are fixed in judgment, righteousness and truth, is the King and

Parliament. Under these, it seems easy to conceive subordinate powers in
gradation, till we descend to the legislative of a town council, or even a
private social club. These have each “a one whole legislative” subordinate,
which, when it don’t counteract the laws of any of its superiors, is to be
indulged. Even when the laws of subordination are transgressed, the
superior does not destroy the subordinate, but will negative its acts, as it
may in all cases when disapproved. This right of negative is essential, and
may be inforced: But in no case are the essential rights of the subjects,
inhabiting the subordinate dominions, to be destroyed. This would put it in
the power of the superior to reduce the inferior to a state of slavery; which
cannot be rightfully done, even with conquered enemies and rebels. After
satisfaction and security is obtained of the former, and examples are made
of so many of the latter, as the ends of government require, the rest are to be
restored to all the essential rights of men and of citizens. This is the great
law of nature: and agreeable to this law, is the constant practice of all good
and mild governments. This lenity and humanity has no where been carried
further than in Great Britain. The Colonies have been so remarkable for
loyalty, that there never has been any instance of rebellion or treason in
them. This loyalty is in very handsome terms acknowledged by the author
of the administration of the colonies. “It has been often suggested that care
should be taken in the administration of the plantations, lest, in some future
time, these colonies should become independent of the mother country. But
perhaps it may be proper on this occasion, nay, it is justice to say it, that if,
by becoming independent, is meant a revolt, nothing is further from their
nature, their interest, their thoughts. If a defection from the alliance of the
mother country be suggested, it ought to be, and can be truly said, that their
spirit abhors the sense of such; their attachment to the protestant succession
in the house of Hanover, will ever stand unshaken; and nothing can

eradicate from their hearts their natural and almost mechanical, affection to
Great Britain, which they conceive under no other sense, nor call by any
other name, than that of home. Any such suggestion, therefore, is a false
and unjust aspersion on their principles and affections; and can arise from
nothing but an intire ignorance of their circumstances.”17 After all this
loyalty, it is a little hard to be charged with claiming, and represented as
aspiring after, independency. The inconsistency of this I leave. We have said
that the loyalty of the colonies has never been suspected; this must be
restricted to a just suspicion. For it seems there have long been groundless
suspicions of us in the minds of individuals. And there have always been
those who have endeavoured to magnify these chimerical fears. I find Mr.
Dummer complaining of this many years since. “There is, says he, one
thing more I have heard often urged against the charter colonies, and indeed
tis what one meets with from people of all conditions and qualities, tho’
with due respect to their better judgments, I can see neither reason nor
colour for it. ’Tis said that their increasing numbers and wealth, joined to
their great distance from Britain, will give them an opportunity, in the
course of some years, to throw off their dependence on the nation, and
declare themselves a free state, if not curb’d in time, by being made entirely
subject to the crown.”18
This jealousy has been so long talked of, that many seem to believe it
really well grounded. Not that there is danger of a “revolt”, even in the
opinion of the author of the administration, but that the colonists will by
fraud or force, avail themselves, in “fact or in deed”, of an independent
legislature. This, I think, would be a revolting with a vengeance. What
higher revolt can there be, than for a province to assume the right of an
independent legislative, or state? I must therefore think this a greater
aspersion on the Colonists, than to charge them with a design to revolt, in

the sense in which the Gentleman allows they have been abused: It is a
more artful and dangerous way of attacking our liberties, than to charge us
with being in open rebellion. That could be confuted instantly: but this
seeming indirect way of charging the colonies, with a desire of throwing off
their dependency, requires more pains to confute it than the other, therefore
it has been recurred to. The truth is, Gentlemen have had departments in
America, the functions of which they have not been fortunate in executing.
The people have by these means been rendered uneasy, at bad Provincial
measures. They have been represented as factious, seditious, and inclined to
democracy, whenever they have refused passive obedience to provincial
mandates, as arbitrary as those of a Turkish Bashaw: I say, Provincial
mandates; for to the King and Parliament they have been ever submissive
and obedient.
These representations of us, many of the good people of England
swallow with as much ease, as they would a bottle-bubble, or any other
story of a cock and a bull; and the worst of it is, among some of the most
credulous, have been found Stars and Garters. However, they may all rest
assured, the Colonists, who do not pretend to understand themselves so well
as the people of England; tho’ the author of the Administration makes them
the fine compliment, to say, they “know their business much better,” yet,
will never think of independency. Were they inclined to it, they know the
blood and the treasure it would cost, if ever effected; and when done, it
would be a thousand to one if their liberties did not fall a sacrifice to the
victor.
We all think ourselves happy under Great-Britain. We love, esteem and
reverence our mother country, and adore our King. And could the choice of
independency be offered the colonies, or subjection to Great-Britain upon
any terms above absolute slavery, I am convinced they would accept the

latter. The ministry, in all future generations may rely on it, that British
America will never prove undutiful, till driven to it, as the last fatal resort
against ministerial oppression, which will make the wisest mad, and the
weakest strong.
These colonies are and always have been, “entirely subject to the
crown,” in the legal sense of the terms. But if any politician of “tampering
activity, of wrong-headed inexperience, misled to be meddling,”19 means,
by “curbing the colonies in time,” and by “being made entirely subject to
the crown;” that this subjection should be absolute, and confined to the
crown, he had better have suppressed his wishes. This never will nor can be
done, without making the colonists vassals of the crown. Subjects they are;
their lands they hold of the crown, by common soccage, the freest feudal
tennure, by which any hold their lands in England, or any where else.
Would these gentlemen carry us back to the state of the Goths and Vandals,
and revive all the military tenures and bondage which our fore-fathers could
not bear? It may be worth noting here, that few if any instances can be
given, where colonies have been disposed to forsake or disobey a tender
mother: But history is full of examples, that armies stationed as guards over
provinces, have seized the prey for their general, and given him a crown at
the expence of his master. Are all ambitious generals dead? Will no more
rise up hereafter? The danger of a standing army in remote provinces is
much greater to the metropolis, than at home. Rome found the truth of this
assertion, in her Sylla’s, her Pompey’s and Cæsars; but she found it too late:
Eighteen hundred years have roll’d away since her ruin. A continuation of
the same liberties that have been enjoyed by the colonists since the
revolution, and the same moderation of government exercised towards
them, will bind them in perpetual lawful and willing subjection, obedience
and love to Great-Britain: She and her colonies will both prosper and

flourish: The monarchy will remain in sound health and full vigor at that
blessed period, when the proud arbitrary tyrants of the continent shall either
unite in the deliverance of the human race, or resign their crowns. Rescued,
human nature must and will be, from the general slavery that has so long
triumphed over the species. Great-Britain has done much towards it: What a
Glory will it be for her to complete the work throughout the world!
The author of the Administration (page 54) “describes” the defects of
the “provincial courts,” by a “very description,” the first trait of which is,
“The ignorance of the judges.” Whether the description, or the description
of the description, are verily true, either as applied by Lord Hale, or the
Administrator, is left to the reader. I only ask, who makes the judges in the
provinces? I know of but two colonies, viz. Connecticut and Rhode-Island,
where they are chosen by the people. In all other colonies, they are either
immediately appointed by the crown, or by his Majesty’s governor, with the
advice of what the Administrator calls, the “governor’s council of state.”
And if they are in general such ignorant creatures, as the Administrator
describes them, ’tis the misfortune, not the fault, of the people, in the
colonies. However, I believe, justice in general, is as well administred in the
colonies, as it will be when every thing is devolved upon a court of
admiralty, general or provincial. The following is very remarkable. “In
those popular governments, and where every executive officer is under a
dependence for a temporary, wretched, and I had almost said arbitrary
support, on the deputies of the people.20
Why is the temporary support found fault with? Would it be wise to
give a governor a salary for a longer time than his political life? As this is
quite as uncertain as his natural life, it has been granted annually. So every
governor has the chance of one year’s salary after he is dead. All the King’s
officers, are not even in the charter provinces “dependent on the people” for

support. The judges of the admiralty, these mirrors of justice, to be trusted,
when none of the common law courts are, have all their commissions from
home. These, besides other fees, have so much per cent on all they
condemn, be it right or wrong, and this by act of parliament. Yet so great is
their integrity, that it never was suspected that 50 per cent, if allowed,
would have any influence on their decrees.
Custom-house officers universally, and Naval-officers, in all but two or
three of the colonies, are, I believe, appointed directly from home, or by
instruction to the Governor: and take just what they please, for any restraint
they are under by the provincial acts. But on whom should a Governor
depend for his honorable support, but the people? Is not the King fed from
the field, and from the labor of his people? Does not his Majesty himself
receive his aids from the free grant of his parliament? Do not all these
originate in the house of commons? Did the house of Lords ever originate a
grant? Do not our law books inform us that the Lords only assent or dissent,
but never so much as propose an amendment, on a money bill? The King
can take no more than the Parliament will give him, and yet some of his
Governors have tho’t it an insufferable hardship, that they could not take
what they pleased. To take leave of the administrator, there are in his book
some good hints, but a multiplicity of mistakes in fact, and errors in matters
of right, which I have not time to mention particularly.
Ireland is a conquered kingdom; and yet have tho’t they received very
hard measure in some of the prohibitions and restrictions of their trade. But
were the colonies ever conquered? Have they not been subject and
obedient, and loyal from their settlement? Were not the settlements made
under the British laws and constitution? But if the colonies were all to be
considered as conquered, they are entitled to the essential rights of men and
citizens. And therefore admitting the right of prohibition, in its utmost

extent and latitude; a right of taxation can never be infer’d from that. It may
be for the good of the whole, that a certain commodity should be
prohibited: But this power should be exercised, with great moderation and
impartiality, over dominions, which are not represented, in the national
parliament. I had however rather see this carried with a high hand, to the
utmost rigor, than have a tax of one shilling taken from me without my
consent. A people may be very happy, free and easy among themselves,
without a particular branch of foreign trade: I am sure these colonies have
the natural means of every manufacture in Europe, and some that are out of
their power to make or produce. It will scarcely be believed a hundred years
hence, that the American manufactures could have been brought to such
perfection, as they will then probably be in, if the present measures are
pushed. One single act of parliament, we find has set people a thinking, in
six months, more than they had done in their whole lives before. It should
be remembred, that the most famous and flourishing manufactures, of wool,
in France, were begun by Lewis 14, not an hundred years ago; and they
now bid fair to rival the English, in every port abroad. All the manufactures
that Great-Britain could make, would be consumed in America, and in her
own plantations, if put on a right footing; for which a greater profit in return
would be made, than she will ever see again for woollen sent to any part of
Europe.
But tho’ it be allow’d, that liberty may be enjoy’d in a comfortable
measure, where prohibitions are laid on the trade of a kingdom or province;
yet if taxes are laid on either, without consent, they cannot be said to be
free. This barrier of liberty being once broken down, all is lost. If a shilling
in the pound may be taken from me against my will, why may not twenty
shillings; and if so, why not my liberty or my life? Merchants were always
particularly favor’d by the common law—“All merchants, except enemies,

may safely come into England, with their goods and merchandize”—2 Inst.
28.—And why not as well to the plantations? Are they not entitled to all the
British privileges? No, they must be confined in their imports and exports,
to the good of the metropolis. Very well, we have submitted to this. The act
of navigation is a good act, so are all that exclude foreign manufactures
from the plantations, and every honest man will readily subscribe to them.
Moreover, “Merchant strangers, are also to come into the realm and depart
at pleasure; and they are to be friendly entertained.” 2 Ri. C. 1. But to
promote the manufactures of England, ’tis tho’t best to shut up the colonies
in a manner from all the world. Right as to Europe: But for GOD’s sake,
must we have no trade with other colonies? In some cases the trade betwen
British colony and colony is prohibited, as in wool, &c. Granting all this to
be right, is it not enough? No, duties and taxes must be paid without any
consent or representation in parliament. The common law, that inestimable
privilege of a jury, is also taken away in all trials in the colonies, relating to
the revenue, if the informers have a mind to go the admiralty; as they ever
have done, and ever will do, for very obvious reasons. “It has ever been
boasted, says Mr. Dummer in his defence of the charters, as the peculiar
privilege of an Englishman, and the security of his property, to be tryed by
his country, and the laws of the land: Whereas this admiralty method
deprives him of both, as it puts his estate in the disposal of a single person,
and makes the civil law the rule of judgment; which tho’ it may not
properly be called foreign, being the law of nations, yet ’tis what he has not
consented to himself, nor his representative for him. A jurisdiction therefore
so founded, ought not to extend beyond what necessity requires”— “If
some bounds are not set to the jurisdiction of the admiralty, beyond which it
shall not pass, it may in time, like the element to which it ought to be
confin’d, grow outrageous, and overflow the banks of all the other courts of

justice.” I believe it has never been doubted by one sound, common lawyer
of England, whether a court of admiralty ever answer’d many good ends;
“the court of King’s bench has a power to restrain the court of admiralty in
England; and the reasons for such restraining power are as strong in New
England as in Great-Britain,” and in some respects more so: Yet Mr.
Dummer mentions, a clamour that was raised at home by a judge of the
admiralty for New England, who complain’d “that the common law courts
by granting prohibitions, weaken, and in a manner suppress the authority of
this court, and all the good ends for which it was constituted.” Thus we see,
that the court of admiralty long ago discover’d, no very friendly disposition
towards the common law courts here; and the records of the house of
Representatives afford us a notable instance of one, who was expelled the
house, of which he had been an unworthy member, for the abusive
misrepresentations of the province, by him secretly made.
Trade and traffick, says lord Coke, “is the livelihood of a merchant, the
life of the commonwealth, wherein the King and every subject hath interest;
for the merchant is the good Bailiff of the realm, to export and vent the
native commodities of the realm, and to import and bring in, the necessary
commodities for the defence and benefit of the Realm”—2 Inst. 28. reading
on Magna Charta. C. 14—And are not the merchants of British America
entitled to a livelihood also? Are they not British subjects? Are not an
infinity of commodities carried from hence for the benefit of the realm, for
which in return come an infinity of trifles, which we could do without?
Manufactures we must go into if our trade is cut off; our country is too cold
to go naked in, and we shall soon be unable to make returns to England
even for necessaries.
“When any law or custom of parliament is broken, and the crown
possessed of a precedent, how difficult a thing is it to restore the subject

again to his former freedom and safety?” 2 Inst. on the confirmation of the
great charter—which provides in these words: “And for so much as divers
people of our realm, are in fear, that the aids and tasks which they have
given to us before time, towards our wars, and other business of their own
grant and good will (howsoever they were made) might turn to a bondage
to them and their heirs, because they might be at another time found in the
rolls, and likewise for the prices taken throughout the realm by our
ministers; We have granted for us and our heirs, that we shall not draw such
aids, tasks nor prices into a custom, for any thing that hath been done
heretofore, be it by roll, or any other precedent that may be founden.”
By the first chapter of this act, the great charter is declared to be the
common law. I would ask, whether we have not reason to fear, that the great
aids, freely given by these provinces in the late war, will in like manner turn
to our bondage, if they are to be kept on and increased during a peace, for
the maintenance of a standing army here?—If tis said those aids were given
for our own immediate defence, and that England spent millions in the same
cause; I answer; The names of his present Majesty, and his royal Grandfather, will be ever dear to every loyal British American, for the protection
they afforded us, and the salvation, under God, effected by their arms; but
with regard to our fellow-subjects of Britain, we never were a whit behind
hand with them. The New England Colonies in particular, were not only
settled without the least expence to the mother country, but they have all
along defended themselves against the frequent incursions of the most
inhuman Salvages, perhaps on the face of the whole earth, at their own cost:
Those more than brutal men, spirited and directed by the most inveterate, as
well as most powerful enemy of Great Britain, have been constantly
annoying our infant settlements for more than a century; spreading terror
and desolation, and sometimes depopulating whole villages in a night: yet

amidst the fatigues of labor, and the horrors of war and bloodshed, Heaven
vouchsaf’d its smiles. Behold, an extensive territory, settled, defended, and
secured to his Majesty, I repeat it, without the least expence to the mother
country, till within twenty years past!—When Louisbourg was reduced to
his late Majesty, by the valor of his New-England subjects, the parliament,
it must be own’d, saw meet to refund part of the charges: And every one
knows the importance of Louisbourg, in the consultations of Aix la
Chapple; but for the loss of our young men, the riches and strength of a
country, not indeed slain by the enemy, but overborn by the uncommon
hardships of the siege, and their confinement in garrison afterwards, there
could be no recompence made.—In the late war, the northern colonies not
only rais’d their full quota of men, but they went even beyond their ability:
they are still deeply in debt, notwithstanding the parliamentary grants,
annually made them, in part of their expences, in the common, national,
cause: Had it not been for those grants, they had all been bankrupt long ago;
while the sugar colonies, have born little or no share in it: They indeed sent
a company or two of Negroes and Molattoes, if this be worth mentioning, to
the sieges of Gaudaloupe, Martineco and the Havanna: I do not recollect
any thing else that they have done; while the flower of our youth were
annually pressed by ten thousands into the service, and there treated but
little better, as we have been told, than hewers of wood and drawers of
water. Provincial acts for impressing were obtained, only by letters of
requisition from a secretary of state to a Governor; requiring him to use his
influence to raise men; and sometimes, more than were asked for or wanted,
were pressed, to give a figure to the Governor, and shew his influence; a
remarkable instance of which might be mentioned. I would further observe,
that Great-Britain was as immediately interested in the late war in America,
as the colonies were. Was she not threatned with an invasion at the same

time we were? Has she not an immense trade to the colonies? The British
writers say, more than half her profitable trade is to America: All the profits
of our trade center there, and is little enough to pay for the goods we
import. A prodigious revenue arises to the Crown on American exports to
Great-Britain, which in general is not murmured at: No manufacture of
Europe besides British, can be lawfully bro’t here; and no honest man
desires they ever should, if the laws were put in execution upon all. With
regard to a few Dutch imports that have made such a noise, the truth is, very
little has been or could be run, before the apparatus of guardships; for the
officers of some ports did their duty, while others may have made a
monopoly of smuggling, for a few of their friends, who probably paid them
large contributions; for it has been observed, that a very small office in the
customs in America has raised a man a fortune sooner than a Government.
The truth is, the acts of trade have been too often evaded; but by whom?
Not by the American merchants in general, but by some former customhouse officers, their friends and partizans. I name no man, not being about
to turn informer: But it has been a notorious grievance, that when the King
himself cannot dispense with an act of parliament, there have been customhouse officers who have practised it for years together, in favor of those
towards whom they were graciously disposed.
But to return to the subject of taxation: I find that “the lords and
commons cannot be charged with any thing for the defence of the realm, for
the safe-guard of the sea, &c. unless by their will in parliament.” Ld. Coke,
on Magna Charta, Cap. 30.
“Impositions neither in time of war, or other the greatest necessity or
occasion, that may be, much less in the time of peace, neither upon foreign
or inland commodities, of what nature soever, be they never so superfluous
or unnecessary, neither upon merchants, strangers, nor denizens, may be

laid by the King’s absolute power, without assent of parliament, be it never
for so short a time.” Viner Prerogative of the King, Ea. 1. cites 2 Molloy.
320. Cap. 12. sec. 1.
“In the reign of Edward 3, the black Prince of Wales having Aquitain
granted to him, did lay an imposition of fuage or focage a foco, upon his
subjects of that dukedom, viz. a shilling for every fire, called hearth silver,
which was of so great discontentment and odious to them, that it made them
revolt. And nothing since this time has been imposed by pretext of any
prerogative, upon merchandizes, imported into or exported out of this
realm, until Queen Mary’s time.” 2 Inst. 61.
Nor has any thing of that kind taken place since the revolution. King
Charles 1. his ship-money every one has heard of.
It may be said that these authorities will not serve the colonists,
because the duties laid on them are by parliament. I acknowledge the
difference of fact; but cannot see the great difference in equity, while the
colonists are not represented in the house of commons: And therefore with
all humble deference I apprehend, that ’till the colonists are so represented,
the spirit of all these authorities will argue strongly in their favour. When
the parliament shall think fit to allow the colonists a representation in the
house of commons, the equity of their taxing the colonies, will be as clear
as their power is at present of doing it without, if they please. When Mr.
Dummer wrote his defence of the charters, there was a talk of taking them
away, by act of parliament. This defence is dedicated to the right
honourable the Ld. Carteret, then one of his Majesty’s principal secretaries
of state, since Earl of Granville. His third proposition is, that “it is not for
the interest of the crown to resume the charters, if forfeited.” This he
proves; as also that it would be more for the interest of Great Britain to
enlarge, rather than diminish, the privilege of all the colonists. His last

proposition is, that it “seems inconsistent with justice to disfranchise the
charter colonies by an act of parliament.”
“It seems therefore, says he, a severity without a precedent, that a
people, who have the misfortune of being a thousand leagues distant from
their sovereign, a misfortune great enough in itself, should, unsummoned,
unheard, in one day, be deprived of their valuable privileges, which they
and their fathers have enjoyed for near a hundred years.” ’Tis true, as he
observes, “the legislative power is absolute and unaccountable, and King,
lords and commons, may do what they please; but the question here is not
about power, but right” (or rather equity) “and shall not the supreme
judicature of all the nation do right”? “One may say, that what the
parliament cannot do justly, they cannot do at all. In maximis minima est
licentia. The higher the power is, the greater caution is to be used in the
execution of it; because the sufferer is helpless and without resort.” I never
heard that this reasoning gave any offence. Why should it? Is it not exactly
agreeable to the decisions of parliament and the determinations of the
highest executive courts? (See the Appendix.) But if it was thought hard
that charter privileges should be taken away by act of parliament, Is it not
much harder to be in part, or in whole, disfranchised of rights, that have
been always tho’t inherent to a British subject, namely, to be free from all
taxes, but what he consents to in person, or by his representative? This
right, if it could be traced no higher than Magna Charta, is part of the
common law, part of a British subjects birthright, and as inherent and
perpetual, as the duty of allegiance; both which have been bro’t to these
colonies, and have been hitherto held sacred and inviolable, and I hope and
trust ever will. ’Tis humbly conceived, that the British colonists (except
only the conquered, if any) are, by Magna Charta, as well entitled to have a
voice in their taxes, as the subjects within the realm. Are we not as really

deprived of that right, by the parliament assessing us before we are
represented in the house of commons, as if the King should do it by his
prerogative? Can it be said with any colour of truth or justice, that we are
represented in parliament?
As to the colonists being represented by the provincial agents, I know
of no power ever given them, but to appear before his Majesty, and his
ministry. Sometimes they have been directed to petition the parliament: But
they none of them have, and I hope never will have, a power given them, by
the colonists, to act as representatives, and to consent to taxes; and if they
should make any concessions to the ministry, especially without order, the
provinces could not by that be considered as represented in parliament.
Hibernia habet Parliamenta & faciunt leges et nostra statuta non
ligant eos, quia non mittant milites ad Parliamentum. sed personæ eorum
sunt subjecti Regis, sicut inhabitantes Calinæ Gasconiæ & Guienæ. 12 Rep.
III.

cites R. 3. 12.—
“Ireland hath parliaments, and make laws, and our statutes do not bind

them, because they send no Knights to parliament; but their persons are
subjects of the King, as the inhabitants of Guiene, Gascony, &c.”
Yet, if specially named, or by general words included as within any of
the King’s dominions, Ireland, says Ld. Coke, might be bound. 4 Inst. 351.
From all which, it seems plain, that the reason why Ireland and the
plantations are not bound, unless named by an Act of Parliament, is,
because they are not represented in the British parliament. Yet, in special
cases, the British parliament has an undoubted right, as well as power, to
bind both by their acts. But whether this can be extended to an indefinite
taxation of both, is the great question. I conceive the spirit of the British
constitution must make an exception of all taxes, until it is tho’t fit to unite
a dominion to the realm. Such taxation must be considered either as uniting

the dominions to the realm, or disfranchising them. If they are united, they
will be intitled to a representation, as well as Wales; if they are so taxed
without a union, or representation, they are so far disfranchised.
I don’t find any thing that looks like a duty on the colonies before the
25th of C. 2. c. 7. imposing a duty on enumerated commodities. The liberty
of the subject was little attended to in that reign. If the nation could not
fully assert their rights till the revolution, the colonies could not expect to
be heard. I look on this act rather as a precedent of power, than of right and
equity; if ’tis such, it will not affect my argument. The act appointing a tax
on all mariners, of a certain sum per month, to be deducted out of their
wages, is not to be compared with this. Mariners are not inhabitants of any
part of the dominions: The sea is their element, till they are decrepit, and
then the hospital is open for all mariners who are British subjects without
exception. The general post-office established thro’ the dominions, is for
the convenience of trade and commerce: It is not laying any burthen upon
it; for besides that it is upon the whole cheaper to correspond in this way
than any other, every one is at liberty to send his own letters by a friend.
The act of the 6th of his late Majesty, tho’ it imposes a duty in terms, has
been said to be designed for a prohibition; which is probable from the sums
imposed; and ’tis pity it had not been so expressed, as there is not the least
doubt of the just and equitable right of the parliament to lay prohibitions
thro’ the dominions, when they think the good of the whole requires it. But
as has been said, there is an infinite difference between that and the exercise
of unlimited power of taxation, over the dominions, without allowing them
a representation:—It is said that the duties imposed by the new act will
amount to a prohibition: Time only can ascertain this. The utility of this act
is so fully examined in the appendix, that I shall add nothing on that head
here. It may be said that the colonies ought to bear their proportion of the

national burdens: ’Tis just they should, and I think I have proved they have
always done it freely and chearfully, and I know no reason to doubt but that
they ever will.
Sometimes we have been considered only as the corporations in
England: And it may be urged that it is no harder upon us to be taxed by
parliament for the general cause than for them, who besides are at the
expence of their corporate subordinate government.21 I answer, 1. Those
corporations are represented in parliament. 2. The colonies are and have
been at great expence in raising men, building forts, and supporting the
King’s civil government here. Now I read of no governors and other
officers of his Majesty’s nomination, that the city of London taxes its
inhabitants to support; I know of no forts and garrisons that the city of
London has lately built at its own expence, or of any annual levies that they
have raised for the King’s service and the common cause. These are things
very fitting and proper to be done by a subordinate dominion, and tis their
duty to do all they are able; but it seems but equal they should be allowed to
assess the charges of it themselves. The rules of equity and the principles of
the constitution seem to require this. Those who judge of the reciprocal
rights that subsist between a supreme and subordinate state or dominion, by
no higher rules than are applied to a corporation of button-makers, will
never have a very comprehensive view of them. Yet sorry am I to say it,
many elaborate writers on the administration of the colonies, seem to me
never to rise higher in their notions, than what might be expected from a
secretary to one of the quorum. If I should be ranked among this number, I
shall have this consolation, that I have fallen into what is called very good
company, and among some who have seen very high life below stairs. I
agree with the Administrator, that of whatever revenues raised in the
colonies, if they must be raised without our consent, “the first and special

appropriation of them ought to be to the paying the Governors, and all the
other Crown officers;” for it would be hard for the Colonists to be obliged
to pay them after this. It was on this principle that at the last assembly of
this province, I moved to stop every grant to the officers of the Crown;
more especially as I know some who have built very much upon the fine
salaries they shall receive from the plantation branch of the revenue. Nor
can I think it “injustice to the frame of human nature,”22 to suppose, if I did
not know it, that with similar views several officers of the Crown in some
of the colonies have been pushing for such an act for many years. They
have obtained their wish, and much good it will do them: But I would not
give much for all that will center neat in the exchequer, after deducting the
costs attending the execution of it, and the appropriations to the several
officers proposed by the Administrator. What will be the unavoidable
consequence of all this, suppose another war should happen, and it should
be necessary to employ as many provincials in America as in the last?
Would it be possible for the colonies, after being burthened in their trade,
perhaps after it is ruined, to raise men? Is it probable that they would have
spirit enough to exert themselves? If ’tis said the French will never try for
America, or if they should, regular troops are only to be employed. I grant
our regular troops are the best in the world, and that the experience of the
present officers shews that they are capable of every species of American
service; yet we should guard against the worst. If another tryal for Canada
should take place, which from the known temper of France, we may judge
she will bring on the first fair opportunity, it might require 30 or 40,000
regulars to secure his Majesty’s just rights. If it should be said, that other
American duties must then be levied, besides the impossibility of our being
able to pay them, the danger recurs of a large standing army so remote from
home. Whereas a good provincial militia, with such occasional succours

from the mother country, as exigencies may require, never was, and never
will be attended with hazard. The experience of past times will show, that
an army of 20 or 30,000 veterans, half 3000 miles from Rome, were very
apt to proclaim Cæsars. The first of the name, the assassin of his country
owed his false glory, to stealing the affections of an army from the
commonwealth. I hope these hints will not be taken amiss; they seem to
occur from the nature of the subject I am upon: They are delivered in pure
affection to my King and country, and amount to no reflection on any man.
The best army, and the best men, we may hereafter have, may be led into
temptation; all I think, is, that a prevention of evil is much easier than a
deliverance from it.
The sum of my argument is, That civil government is of God: That the
administrators of it were originally the whole people: That they might have
devolved it on whom they pleased: That this devolution is fiduciary, for the
good of the whole; That by the British constitution, this devolution is on the
King, lords and commons, the supreme sacred and uncontroulable
legislative power, not only in the realm, but thro’ the dominions: That by
the abdication, the original compact was broken to pieces: That by the
revolution, it was renewed, and more firmly established, and the rights and
liberties of the subject in all parts of the dominions, more fully explained
and confirmed: That in consequence of this establishment, and the acts of
succession and union, his Majesty GEORGE III. is rightful king and
sovereign, and with his parliament, the supreme legislative of Great Britain;
France and Ireland, and the dominions thereto belonging: That this
constitution is the most free one, and by far the best, now existing on earth:
That by this constitution, every man in the dominions is a free man: That no
parts of his Majesty’s dominions can be taxed without their consent: That
every part has a right to be represented in the supreme or some subordinate

legislature: That the refusal of this, would seem to be a contradiction in
practice to the theory of the constitution: That the colonies are subordinate
dominions, and are now in such a state, as to make it best for the good of
the whole, that they should not only be continued in the enjoyment of
subordinate legislation, but be also represented in some proportion to their
number and estates, in the grand legislature of the nation: That this would
firmly unite all parts of the British empire, in the greatest peace and
prosperity; and render it invulnerable and perpetual.
1On

King James’s leaving the kingdom and abdicating the government, the
lords would have the word desertion made use of, but the commons thought
it was not comprehensive enough, for that the King might then have liberty
of returning. The Scots rightly called it a forfeiture of the crown, & this in
plain english is the sense of the term abdication as by the convention and
every parliament since applied. See the history and debates of the
convention, and the acts then made.
2The

power of GOD almighty is the only power that can properly and
strictly be called supreme and absolute. In the order of nature immediately
under him, comes the power of a simple democracy or the power of the
whole over the whole. Subordinate to both these, are all other political
powers, from that of the French Monarque, to a petty constable.
3Mr.

Locke.

4Kingcraft

and Priestcraft have fell out so often, that ’tis a wonder this
grand and ancient alliance is not broken off for ever. Happy for mankind
will it be, when such a separation shall take place.
5For

the sake of the unlettered reader ’tis noted, that Monarchy means the
power of one great man; Aristocracy and Oligarchy that of a few; and
Democracy that of all men.
6See

Mr. Locke on the Dissolution of Government.

7Marquis

D’ A.

8Rousseau.
9Of

some American Courts of Admiralty, if the reader pleases.

10Those

in England who borrow the terms of the Spaniards, as well as their
notions of government, apply this term to all Americans of European
Extract; but the Northern colonists apply it only to the Islanders and others
of such extract, under the Torrid Zone.
11This

however was formally declared as to Ireland, but so lately as the
reign of G. I. Upon the old principles of conquest the Irish could not have so
much to say for an exemption, as the unconquered Colonists.
12The

fine defence of the provincial charters by Jeremy Dummer, Esq; the
late very able and learned agent for the province of the Massachusetts Bay,
makes it needless to go into a particular consideration of charter
priviledges. That piece is unanswerable, but by power and might, and other
arguments of that kind.
13See

Magna Charta, the Bill of Rights. 3 Mod. 159; 2 Salkeld 411;
Vaughan 300.
14See

Locke on Government, B II. C xi.

15See

the convention, and acts confirming it.

16Page

39 of the administration.

17Administration,
18Defence.

60.

19Administration.
20Administ.
21See

p 25 26.
34.

56.

Administration of the Colonies.

22Adm.

p. 57.

APPENDIX.
The City of Boston, at their Annual Meeting in May, 1764, made
Choice of Richard Dana, Joseph Green, Nathaniel Bethune, John
Ruddock, Esq’rs; and Mr. Samuel Adams,
INSTRUCTIONS for their REPRESENTATIVES.

to

prepare

The following Instructions were reported by said Committee, and
unanimously Voted.
To Royal Tyler 23, James Otis, Thomas Cushing, and Oxenbridge Thacher,
Esq’rs.
GENTLEMEN,
OUR being chosen by the freeholders and inhabitants of the town of
Boston, to represent them in the General Assembly the ensuing year,
affords you the strongest testimony of that confidence which they place in
your integrity and capacity. By this choice they have delegated to you the
power of acting in their public concerns in general, as your own Prudence
shall direct you; always reserving to themselves the constitutional right of
expressing their mind, and giving you such instruction upon particular
matters, as they at any time shall judge proper.
We therefore your constituents take this opportunity to declare our just
Expectations from you,
That you will constantly use your power and influence in maintaining
the invaluable rights and privileges of the province, of which this town is so
great a part: As well those rights which are derived to us by the royal
charter, as those which being prior to and independent on it, we hold
essentially as free-born subjects of Great-Britain;

Y

That you will endeavour, as far as you shall be able, to preserve that
independence in the house of representatives, which characterizes a free
people; and the want of which may in a great measure prevent the happy
effects of a free government: Cultivating as you shall have opportunity, that
harmony and union there, which is ever desirable to good men, when
founded in principles of virtue and public spirit; and guarding against any
undue weight which may tend to disadjust that critical balance upon which
our happy constitution, and the blessings of it do depend. And for this
purpose, we particularly recommend it to you to use your endeavours to
have a law passed, whereby the seats of such gentlemen as shall accept of
posts of profit from the Crown, or the Governor, while they are members of
the house, shall be vacated, agreeable to an act of the British parliament,
’till their constituents shall have the opportunity of re-electing them, if they
please, or of returning others in their room.
Being members of the legislative body, you will have a special regard
to the morals of this people, which are the basis of public happiness; and
endeavour to have such laws made, if any are still wanting, as shall be best
adapted to secure them: And we particularly desire you carefully to look
into the laws of excise, that if the virtue of the people is endangered by the
multiplicity of oaths therein enjoined, or their trade and business is
unreasonably impeded or embarrassed thereby, the grievance may be
redressed.
As the preservation of morals, as well as property and right, so much
depends upon the impartial distribution of justice, agreeable to good and
wholesome law: And as the judges of the land do depend upon the free
grants of the general assembly for support; it is incumbent upon you at all
times to give your voice for their honourable maintenance, so long as they,
having in their minds an indifference to all other affairs, shall devote

themselves wholly to the duties of their own department, and the further
study of the law, by which their customs, precedents, proceedings and
determinations are adjusted and limited.
You will remember that this province hath been at a very great expence
in carrying on the war; and that it still lies under a very grievous burden of
debt: You will therefore use your utmost endeavor to promote public
frugality as one means to lessen the publick debt.
You will join in any proposals which may be made for the better
cultivating the lands, and improving the husbandry of the province: and as
you represent a town which lives by its trade, we expect in a very particular
manner, that you make it the object of your attention, to support our
commerce in all its just rights, to vindicate it from all unreasonable
impositions, and promote its prosperity—Our trade has for a long time
laboured under great discouragements; and it is with the deepest concern
that we see such further difficulties coming upon it, as will reduce it to the
lowest ebb, if not totally obstruct and ruin it. We cannot help expressing our
surprize that when so early notice was given by the agent, of the intentions
of the ministry, to burthen us with new taxes, so little regard was had to this
most interesting matter, that the court was not even call’d together to
consult about it ’till the latter end of the year; the consequence of which
was, that instructions could not be sent to the agent, tho’ sollicited by him,
’till the evil had got beyond an easy remedy.
There is now no room for further delay: We therefore expect that you
will use your earliest endeavours in the General Assembly, that such
methods may be taken as will effectually prevent these proceedings against
us. By a proper representation, we apprehend it may easily be made to
appear that such severities will prove detrimental to Great Britain itself;
upon which account we have reason to hope that an application, even for a

repeal of the act, should it be already pass’d, will be successful. It is the
trade of the colonies, that renders them beneficial to the mother country:
Our trade, as it is now, and always has been conducted, centers in Great
Britain, and in return for her manufactures, affords her more ready cash,
beyond any comparison, than can possibly be expected by the most
sanguine promoters of these extraordinary methods. We are in short
ultimately yielding large supplies to the revenues of the mother country,
while we are labouring for a very moderate subsistence for ourselves. But if
our trade is to be curtail’d in its most profitable branches, and burdens
beyond all possible bearing laid upon that which is suffer’d to remain, we
shall be so far from being able to take off the manufactures of Great Britain,
that it will be scarce possible for us to earn our bread.—
But what still heightens our apprehensions is, that these unexpected
proceedings may be preparatory to new taxations upon us: For if our trade
may be taxed, why not our lands? Why not the produce of our lands, and
every thing we possess or make use of? This we apprehend annihilates our
charter right to govern and tax ourselves—It strikes at our British
privileges, which as we have never forfeited them, we hold in common with
our fellow subjects who are natives of Britain: If taxes are laid upon us in
any shape without our having a legal representation where they are laid, are
we not reduc’d from the character of free subjects to the miserable state of
tributary slaves?
We therefore earnestly recommend it to you to use your utmost
endeavors, to obtain in the general assembly, all necessary instruction and
advice to our agent at this most critical juncture; that while he is setting
forth the unshaken loyalty of this province and this town—its unrival’d
exertion in supporting his Majesty’s government and rights in this part of
his dominions—its acknowledg’d dependence upon and subordination to

Great-Britain; and the ready submission of its merchants to all just and
necessary regulations of trade; he may be able in the most humble and
pressing manner to remonstrate for us all those rights and privileges which
justly belong to us either by charter or birth.
As his Majesty’s other northern American colonies are embark’d with
us in this most important bottom, we further desire you to use your
endeavors, that their weight may be added to that of this province: that by
the united application of all who are aggrieved, All may happily obtain
redress.

Substance of a Memorial presented the Assembly, in Pursuance of
the above Instructions; and by the House voted to be transmitted
to JASPER MAUDUIT, Esq; Agent for this Province; to be improved
as he may judge proper.
THE publick transactions from William the I. to the revolution, may be
considered as one continued struggle between the prince and the people, all
tending to that happy establishment, which Great-Britain has since enjoyed.
The absolute rights of Englishmen, as frequently declared in
parliament, from Magna Charta, to this time, are the rights of personal
security, personal liberty, and of private property.
The allegiance of British subjects being natural, perpetual and
inseparable from their persons, let them be in what country they may; their
rights are also natural, inherent and perpetual.
By the laws of nature and of nations, the voice of universal reason, and
of God, when a nation takes possession of a desert, uncultivated and
uninhabited country, or purchases of Savages, as was the case with far the
greatest part of the British settlements; the colonists transplanting

themselves, and their posterity, tho’ separated from the principal
establishment, or mother country, naturally become part of the state with its
ancient possessions, and intitled to all the essential rights of the mother
country. This is not only confirmed by the practice of the antients, but by
the moderns ever since the discovery of America. Frenchmen, Spaniards
and Portugals are no greater slaves abroad than at home; and hitherto
Britons have been as free on one side of the atlantic as on the other: And it
is humbly hoped that his Majesty and the Parliament, will in their wisdom
be graciously pleased to continue the colonists in this happy state.
It is presumed, that upon these principles, the colonists have been by
their several charters declared natural subjects, and entrusted with the
power of making their own local laws, not repugnant to the laws of
England, and with the power of taxing themselves.
This legislative power is subject by the same charter to the King’s
negative as in Ireland. This effectually secures the dependence of the
colonies on Great-Britain.—By the thirteenth of George the second,
chapter the seventh, even foreigners having lived seven years in any of the
colonies, are deemed natives on taking the oaths of allegiance, &c. and are
declared by the said act to be his Majesty’s natural born subjects of the
kingdom of Great-Britain, to all intents, constructions and purposes, as if
any of them had been born within the kingdom. The reasons given for this
naturalization in the preamble of the act are, “that the increase of the people
is the means of advancing the wealth and strength of any nation or country;
and that many foreigners and strangers, from the lenity of our government,
the purity of our religion, the benefit of our laws, the advantages of our
trade, and the security of our property, might be induced to come and settle
in some of his Majesty’s colonies in America; if they were partakers of the
advantages and priviledges, which the natural born subjects there enjoy.”24

The several acts of parliament and charters declaratory of the rights
and liberties of the colonies are but in affirmance of the common law, and
law of nature in this point. There are says my Lord Coke, regularly three
incidents to subjects born. (1.) Parents under the actual obedience of the
King. (2.) That the place of his birth be within the King’s dominions. (3.)
The time of his birth to be chiefly considered: For he cannot be a subject
born of one kingdom, that was born under the allegiance of the King of
another kingdom; albeit afterwards the kingdom descends to the King of the
other kingdom. See Calvin’s case, and the several acts of parliament and
decisions on naturalization, from Edward the third to this day. The common
law is received and practiced upon here, and in the rest of the colonies; and
all antient and modern acts of parliament that can be considered as part of,
or in amendment of the common law, together with all such acts of
parliament as expressly name the plantations; so that the power of the
British parliament is held as sacred and as uncontroulable in the colonies as
in England. The question is not upon the general power or right of the
parliament, but whether it is not circumscribed within some equitable and
reasonable bounds? ’Tis hoped it will not be considered as a new doctrine,
that even the authority of the parliament of Great-Britain is circumscribed
by certain bounds, which if exceeded their acts become those of meer
power without right, and consequently void. The judges of England have
declared in favour of these sentiments, when they expressly declare; that
acts of parliament against natural equity are void. That acts against the
fundamental principles of the British constitution are void.25 This doctrine
is agreable to the law of nature and nations, and to the divine dictates of
natural and revealed religion. It is contrary to reason that the supreme
power should have right to alter the constitution. This would imply that
those who are instructed with Sovereignty by the people, have a right to do

as they please. In other words, that those who are invested with power to
protect the people, and support their rights and liberties, have a right to
make slaves of them. This is not very remote from a flat contradiction.
Should the parliament of Great-Britain follow the example of some other
foreign states,26 and vote the King absolute and despotic; would such an act
of parliament make him so? Would any minister in his senses advise a
Prince to accept of such an offer of power? It would be unsafe to accept of
such a donation, because the parliament or donors would grant more than
was ever in their power lawfully to give. The law of nature never invested
them with a power of surrendering their own liberty; and the people
certainly never intrusted any body of men with a power to surrender theirs
in exchange for slavery.27
It is now near three hundred years since the continent of NorthAmerica was first discovered, and that by British subjects.28 Ten
generations have passed away thro’ infinite toils and bloody conflicts in
settling this country. None of those ever dreamed but that they were intitled,
at least, to equal priviledges with those of the same rank born within the
realm.
British America has been hitherto distinguished from the slavish
colonies around about it, as the fortunate Britons have been from most of
their neighbours on the continent of Europe. It is for the interest of GreatBritain that her colonies should be ever thus distinguished. Every man must
wilfully blind himself that don’t see the immense value of our acquisitions
in the late war; and that tho’ we did not retain all at the conclusion of the
peace that we obtained by the sword; yet our gracious Sovereign, at the
same time that he has given a divine lesson of equitable moderation to the
Princes of the earth, has retained sufficient to make the British arms the
dread of the universe, and his name dear to all posterity.

To the freedom of the British constitution, and to their increase of
commerce, ’tis owing that our colonies have flourished without diminishing
the inhabitants of the mother country; quite contrary to the effects of
plantations made by most other nations, which have suffered at home, in
order to aggrandize themselves abroad. This is remarkably the case with
Spain. The subjects of a free and happy constitution of government, have a
thousand advantages to colonize above those who live under despotic
princes. We see how the British colonies on the continent, have out-grown
those of the French, notwithstanding they have ever engaged the Salvages
to keep us back. Their advantages over us in the West-Indies are, among
other causes perhaps, partly owing to these, (1.) A capital neglect in former
reigns, in suffering them to have a firm possession of so many valuable
islands, that we had a better title to than they. (2.) The French unable to
push their settlements effectually on the continent, have bent their views to
the islands, and poured vast numbers into them. (3.) The climate and
business of these islands is by nature much better adapted to Frenchmen
and to Negroes, than to Britons. (4.) The labour of slaves, black or white,
will be ever cheaper than that of freemen, because that of the individuals
among the former, will never be worth so much as with the latter; but this
difference is more than supplied; by numbers under the advantages
abovementioned. The French will ever be able to sell their West-India
produce cheaper than our own islanders; and yet while our own islanders
can have such a price for theirs, as to grow much richer than the French, or
any other of the King’s subjects in America, as is the case, and what the
northern colonies take from the French, and other foreign islands, centers
finally in returns to Great-Britain for her manufactures, to an immense
value, and with a vast profit to her: It is contrary to the first principles of
policy to clog such a trade with duties, much more to prohibit it, to the

risque if not certain destruction of the fishery. It is allowed by the most
accurate British writers on commerce, Mr. Postlethwait in particular, who
seems to favour the cause of the sugar islands, that one half of the immense
commerce of Great-Britain is with her colonies. It is very certain that
without the fishery seven eights of this commerce would cease. The fishery
is the center of motion, upon which the wheel of all the British commerce in
America turns. Without the American trade, would Britain, as a commercial
state, make any great figure at this day in Europe? Her trade in woolen and
other manufactures, is said to be lessening in all parts of the world, but
America, where it is increasing, and capable of infinite increase, from a
concurrence of every circumstance in its favour. Here is an extensive
territory of different climates, which in time will consume, and be able to
pay for as many manufactures as Great-Britain and Ireland can make, if true
maxims are persued. The French for reasons already mentioned, can
underwork, and consequently undersell the English manufactures of GreatBritain in every market in Europe. But they can send none of their
manufactures here; and it is the wish of every honest British American that
they never may; ’tis best they never should; we can do better without the
manufactures of Europe, save those of Great-Britain, than with them: But
without the French West-India produce we cannot; without it our fishery
must infallibly be ruined. When that is gone our own islands will very
poorly subsist. No British manufactures can be paid for by the colonists.
What will follow? One of these two things, both of which it is the interest
of Great-Britain to prevent. (1.) The northern colonists must be content to
go naked, and turn Savages. Or (2.) Become manufacturers of linnen and
woolen, to cloath themselves; which if they cannot carry to the perfection of
Europe, will be very destructive to the interests of Great-Britain. The
computation has been made, and that within bounds, and it can be

demonstrated, that if North-America is only driven to the fatal necessity of
manufacturing a suit of the most ordinary linnen or woolen for each
inhabitant annually, which may be soon done, when necessity the mother of
invention shall operate, Great-Britain & Ireland will loose two millions per
annum, besides a diminution of the revenue to nearly the same amount.
This may appear paradoxical, but a few years experience of the execution of
the sugar act, will sufficiently convince the parliament not only of the
inutility, but destructive tendency of it, while calculations may be little
attended to. That the trade with the colonies has been of surprizing
advantage to Great-Britain, notwithstanding the want of a good regulation is
past all doubt. Great-Britain is well known to have increased prodigiously
both in numbers and in wealth since she began to colonize. To the growth of
the plantations Britain is in a great measure indebted for her present riches
and strength. As the wild wastes of America have been turned into pleasant
habitations, and flourishing trading towns; so many of the little villages and
obscure boroughs in Great-Britain have put on a new face, and suddenly
started up, and become fair markets, and manufacturing towns, and opulent
cities. London itself, which bids fair to be the metropolis of the world, is
five times more populous than it was in the days of Queen Elizabeth. Such
are the fruits of the spirit of commerce and liberty. Hence it is manifest how
much we all owe to that beautiful form of civil government, under which
we have the happiness to live.
It is evidently the interest, and ought to be the care of all those
intrusted with the administration of government, to see that every part of the
British empire enjoys to the full the rights they are intitled to by the laws,
and the advantages which result from their being maintained with
impartiality and vigour. This we have seen reduced to practice in the present
and preceeding reigns; and have the highest reason from the paternal care

and goodness that his Majesty, and the British Parliament, have hitherto
been graciously pleased to discover to all his Majesty’s dutiful and loyal
subjects, and to the colonists in particular, to rest satisfied, that our
priviledges will remain sacred and inviolate. The connection between
Great-Britain and her colonies is so natural and strong, as to make their
mutual happiness depend upon their mutual support. Nothing can tend more
to the destruction of both, and to forward the measures of their enemies,
than sowing the seeds of jealousy, animosity and dissention between the
mother country and the colonies.
A conviction of the truth and importance of these principles, induced
Great-Britain during the late war, to carry on so many glorious enterprizes
for the defence of the colonies; and those on their part to exert themselves
beyond their ability to pay, as is evident from the parliamentary
reimbursements.
If the spirit of commerce was attended to, perhaps, duties would be
every where decreased, if not annihilated, and prohibitions multiplied.
Every branch of trade that hurts a community, should be prohibited for the
same reason that a private gentleman would break off commerce with a
sharper or an extorsive usurer. ’Tis to no purpose to higgle with such
people, you are sure to loose by them. ’Tis exactly so with a nation, if the
balance is against them, and they can possibly subsist without the
commodity, as they generally can in such cases, a prohibition is the only
remedy; for a duty in such case, is like a composition with a thief, that for
five shillings in the pound returned, he shall rob you at pleasure; when if the
thing is examined to the bottom, you are at five shillings expence in
travelling to get back your five shillings, and he is at the same expence in
coming to pay it, so he robs you of but ten shillings in the pound, that you
thus wisely compound for. To apply this to trade, I believe every duty that

was ever imposed on commerce, or in the nature of things can be, will be
found to be divided between the state imposing the duty, and the country
exported from. This if between the several parts of the same kingdom or
dominions of the same Prince, can only tend to embarrass trade, and raise
the price of labour above other states, which is of very pernicious
consequence to the husbandman, manufacturer, mariner and merchant, the
four tribes that support the whole hive. If your duty is upon a commodity of
a foreign state, it is either upon the whole useful and gainful, and therefore
necessary for the husbandmen, manufacturer, mariner or merchant, as
finally bringing a profit to the state by a balance in her favour; or the
importation will work a balance against your state. There is no medium that
we know of.—If the commodity is of the former kind, it should be
prohibited; but if the latter, imported duty free, unless you would raise the
price of labour by a duty on necessaries, or make the above wise
composition for the importation of commodities you are sure to lose by. The
only test of a useful commodity is the gain upon the whole to the state; such
should be free; the only test of a pernicious trade is the loss upon the whole,
or to the community, this should be prohibited. If therefore it can be
demonstrated that the sugar and molasses trade from the northern colonies
to the foreign plantations is upon the whole a loss to the community, by
which term is here meant the three kingdoms and the British dominions
taken collectively, then and not ’till then should this trade be prohibited.
This never has been proved, nor can be; the contrary being certain, to wit,
that the nation upon the whole hath been a vast gainer by this trade, in the
vend of and pay for its manufactures; and a great loss by a duty upon this
trade will finally fall on the British husbandman, manufacturer, mariner &
merchant, and consequently the trade of the nation be wounded, and in
constant danger of being eat out by those who can undersell her.

The art of underselling, or rather of finding means to undersell, is the
grand secret of thrift among commercial states, as well as among
individuals of the same state. Should the British sugar islands ever be able
to supply Great-Britain and her northern colonies with those articles, it will
be time enough to think of a total prohibition; but until that time, both
prohibition and duty will be found to be diametrically opposite to the first
principles of policy. Such is the extent of this continent, and the increase of
its inhabitants, that if every inch of the British sugar islands was as well
cultivated as any part of Jamaica, or Barbadoes, they would not now be able
to supply Great-Britain, and the colonies on this continent. But before such
further improvements can be supposed to take place in our islands, the
demands will be proportionably increased by the increase of the inhabitants
on the continent. Hence the reason is plain why the British sugar planters
are growing rich, and ever will, because the demand for their produce has
and ever will be greater than they can possibly supply, so long as the
English hold this continent, and are unrivalled in the fishery.
We have every thing good and great to hope from our gracious
Sovereign, his Ministry and his Parliament; and trust that when the services
and sufferings of the British American colonies are fully known to the
mother country, and the nature and importance of the plantation trade more
perfectly understood at home, that the most effectual measures will be taken
for perpetuating the British empire in all parts of the world. An empire built
upon the principles of justice, moderation and equity, the only principles
that can make a state flourishing, and enable it to elude the machinations of
its secret and inveterate enemies.
P. S. By ancient and modern gods, p. 51, I mean, all idols, from those of Old
Egypt, to the canonized monsters of modern Rome; and by king-craft and
priest-craft, civil and ecclesiastic polity, as administred in general till the

revolution. I now recollect that I have been credibly informed that the
British Sugar colonists are humane towards their slaves, in comparison with
the others. Therefore in page 70, let it be read, foreign Sugar-Islanders and
foreign Creoles.
FINIS.
23Now

of the honorable Board; in whose room was returned Mr. Thomas
Gray, Merchant.
2413
25“A

G. 2. C. 7.

very important question here presents itself. It essentially belongs to
the society to make laws both in relation to the manner in which it desires to
be governed, and to the conduct of the citizens: This is called the
Legislative Power. The nation may entrust the exercise of it to the Prince, or
to an assembly; or to the assembly and the Prince jointly; who have then a
right of making new, and abrogating old laws. It is here demanded whether,
if their power extends so far as to the fundamental laws, they may change
the constitution of the state? The principles we have laid down lead us to
decide this point with certainty, that the authority of these legislators does
not extend so far, and that they ought to consider the fundamental laws as
sacred, if the nation has not in very express terms given them the power to
change them. For the constitution of the state ought to be fixed; and since
that was first established by the nation, which afterwards trusted certain
persons with the legislative power, the fundamental laws are excepted from
their commission. It appears that the society had only resolved to make
provision for the state’s being always furnished with laws suited to
particular conjunctures, and gave the legislature for that purpose, the power
of abrogating the ancient civil and political laws, that were not fundamental,
and of making new ones: But nothing leads us to think that it was willing to
submit the constitution itself to their pleasure.

When a nation takes possession of a distant country, and settles a colony
there, that country though separated from the principal establishment, or
mother country, naturally becomes a part of the state, equally with its
ancient possessions. Whenever the political laws, or treaties make no
distinction between them, every thing said of the territory of a nation, ought
also to extend to its colonies.” D’ Vattel.
“An act of parliament made against natural equity, as to make a man
judge in his own cause, would be void; For jura naturæ sunt immutabilia.
Hob 87. Trin. 12. Jac. Day v. Savage S. C. and P. cited Arg. 10. Mod. 115.
Hill. 11 Ann. C. B. in the case of Thornby and Fleetwood, “but says, that
this must be a clear case, and judges will strain hard rather than interpret an
act void, ab initio.” This is granted, but still their authority is not boundless,
if subject to the controul of the judges in any case.
“Holt. Chief Justice thought what Lord Coke says in Doctor Bonham’s
case a very reasonable and true saying, that if an act of parliament should
ordain that the same person should be both party and judge in his own
cause, it would be a void act of parliament, and an act of parliament can do
no wrong, tho’ it may do several things that look pretty odd; for it may
discharge one from the allegiance he lives under, and restore to the state of
nature; but it cannot make one that lives under a government both judge and
party: per Holt. C. J. 12 Mod. 687, 688, Hill. 13 W. 3. B. R. in the case of
the city of London v. Wood—It appears in our books, that in several cases
the common law shall controul acts of parliament, and sometimes adjudge
them to be utterly void; for when an act of parliament is against common
right and reason, or repugnant or impossible to be performed, the common
law shall controul it, and adjudge it to be void, and therefore 8 E. 3 30.
Thomas Tregor’s case upon the statute of W. 2. Cap 38 and Art. Sup. Chart
9. Herle said that sometimes statutes are made contrary to law and right,
which the makers of them perceiving will not put them in execution 8 Rep
118 Hill. 7. J. Dr. Bonham’s case.
26Sweden,
27“But

Denmark, France, &c.

if the whole state be conquered, if the nation be subdued, in what
manner can the victor treat it without transgressing the bounds of justice?

What are his rights over the conquest? Some have dared to advance this
monstrous principle, that the conqueror is absolute master of his conquest;
that he may dispose of it as his property, treat it as he pleases, according to
the common expression of treating a state as a conquered country; and
hence they derive one of the sources of despotic government: But enough of
those that reduce men to the state of transferable goods, or use them like
beasts of burden, who deliver them up as the property or patrimony of
another man. Let us argue on principles countenanced by reason and
becoming humanity. The whole right of the conqueror proceeds from the
just defence of himself, which contains the support and prosecution of his
rights. Thus when he has totally subdued a nation with whom he had been
at war, he may without dispute cause justice to be done him, with regard to
what gave rise to the war, and require payment for the expence and damage
he has sustained; he may according to the exigency of the case impose
penalties on it as an example, he may should prudence so dictate disable it
from undertaking any pernicious designs for the future. But in securing all
these views the mildest means are to be preferred. We are always to
remember, that the law of nature permits no injury to be done to an enemy,
unless in taking measures necessary for a just defence, and a reasonable
security. Some princes have only imposed a tribute on it; others have been
satisfied of stripping it of some privileges, dismembring a province, or
keeping it in awe by fortresses; others as their quarrel was only with the
sovereign in person, have left a nation in the full enjoyment of all its rights,
only setting a sovereign over it. But if the conqueror thinks proper to retain
the sovereignty of the vanquished state, and has such a right; the manner in
which he is to treat the state still flows from the same principles. If the
sovereign be only the just object of his complaint, reason declares that by
his conquest he acquires only such rights as actually belonged to the
dethroned sovereign, and on the submission of his people he is to govern it
according to the laws of the state. If the people do not voluntarily submit,
the state of war subsists.” “When a sovereign as pretending to have the
absolute disposal of a people whom he has conquered, is for inslaving them,
he causes the state of war to subsist between this people & him.” Mr. De
Vattel. B. 3. C. 10. sec. 201.

28The

Cabots discovered the Continent before the Spaniards.