PAMPHLET 2
Francis Bernard, “Principles of Law and Polity, Applied to the
Government of the British Colonies in America. Written in the
Year 1764.” From Select Letters on the Trade and Government
of America; and the Principles of Law and Polity, Applied to
the American Colonies. London, 1774.
By 1764 many current and former colonial officials were emphasizing the need to reform and tighten
up the newly enlarged empire. That year an influential anonymously published treatise entitled The
Administration of the Colonies, written by Thomas Pownall, who had held numerous positions in the
colonies including the governorship of Massachusetts, observed that with the coming of peace there
was a “general idea of some revolution of events, beyond the ordinary course of things; some general
apprehension, of something new arising in the world; . . . something that is to be guarded against, on
one hand, or that is to be carried to advantage on the other. There is an universal apprehension of
some new crisis forming.”
Francis Bernard was royal governor of Massachusetts Bay from 1760 to 1769, and for many
American colonists he would come to symbolize much that was wrong with the governance of the
British Empire. Although Bernard did not publish the ninety-seven point plan for the empire that
follows until 1774 in London, he actually wrote it in 1764, in Boston. At that time he had a few
copies printed in the provincial capital, which he sent for their private edification to several royal
officials in London, including Lord Halifax, who by 1763 had become secretary of state for the
Southern Department; Lord Hillsborough, president of the Board of Trade; and Lord Barrington,
treasurer of the Royal Navy and Bernard’s patron. Bernard’s proposals represented the kinds of ideas
for imperial reform that had long been circulating among second-level bureaucrats in the empire.
With British politics in the 1760s in disarray, as ministries rose and fell one after another, much of
what stability existed in the British government came from such undersecretaries and sub-ministers
as Thomas Whately, secretary to the Treasury and author of the Stamp Act, and John Pownall,
secretary to the Board of Trade, who received a copy of Bernard’s proposals in 1764. Not only did
the relative permanence of these second-level bureaucrats mark the beginnings of a modern British
civil service, their steady presence in the government gave what evenness there was to the

implementation of the imperial reforms in the 1760s and 1770s. These bureaucrats often had a clearer
sense of the problems facing imperial administrators in America than did their political superiors in
the privy council, and, like Bernard, they had very definite ideas about what was needed to solve
them.

PREFACE IN THE YEAR 1764.

A

VIEW

of the present wealth, power, and extension of the British

Empire is alarming as well as pleasing: we cannot but be concerned

for the stability of a fabrick built on so disjoined foundations, and raised to
so great a heighth; and must be convinced that it will require much political
skill to secure its duration. The most obvious means to effect this, must be
an Union of the several parts of this vast body, and especially a Connection
between the Seat of Empire and its Dependencies; a Connection not created
by temporary expedients, or supported by enforced subjection; but
established upon fixed Principles of Law and Polity, and maintained by a
regular, free, and equitable subordination. What are the principles which
will best connect the Head and the Members of this great Empire is the
subject of the present enquiry. They ought to be simple, plain, and certain,
or they will not be suitable to their general purpose; they ought to be
generally admitted, or they will not have their full effect; they must be such
as will stand the test of reason, or they will not be generally admitted.
In this disputative age, and in a science of all the most disputative, it
may seem a difficult task to attempt to settle a general theory for a business
in which such a variety of passions, prejudices, and interests, are like to
interpose. Sensible of this, and studious only of Truth and Utility, the writer
has avoided declamation, and kept close to argument. He has reduced his
whole subject into a set of propositions; beginning with first principles
which are self-evident, proceeding to propositions capable of positive proof,
and descending to hypotheses which are to be determined by degrees of
probability only. This was intended to be a perfect chain; the avoiding of
prolixity is the cause why it is not so: where any links shall appear to be

wanting, the judicious reader will easily supply them. The advantages of
this kind of writing are obvious: by seeing the principles and the reasoning
of the arguments laid before him articulately, the reader can more precisely
determine what to assent to, and what to deny; and the writer, if he should
appear to be mistaken, will have the merit of contributing to his own
conviction.
The present expectation, that a new Regulation of the American
Governments will soon take place, probably arises more from the opinion
the public has of the abilities of the present Ministry, than from any thing
that has transpired from the Cabinet: it cannot be supposed that their
penetration can overlook the necessity of such a Regulation, nor their public
spirit fail to carry it into execution. But it may be a question, whether the
present is a proper time for this work: more urgent business may stand
before it; some preparatory steps may be required to precede it; caution and
deliberation may retard it: but these will only serve to postpone. As we may
expect that this Reformation, like all others, will be opposed by powerful
prejudices, it may not be amiss to reason with them at leisure, and
endeavour to take off their force before they become opposed to
Government.

Principles of Law and Polity.
1. THE Kingdom of Great Britain is imperial; that is, Sovereign, and not
subordinate to or dependent upon any earthly power.
2. In all imperial states there resides somewhere or other an absolute
power, which we will call the Sovereignty.
3. The Sovereignty of Great Britain is in the King in Parliament; that
is, in the King, acting with the advice and consent of the Lords and the
Commons (by their Representatives), assembled in the Parliament of Great
Britain.
4. The King in Parliament has the sole right of legislation, and the
supreme superintendency of the government; and, in this plenitude of
power, is absolute, uncontrolable, and accountable to none; and therefore, in
a political sense, can do no wrong.
5. The Execution of the government is in the King alone, to be
exercised according to the laws of the country, written and unwritten.
6. The exercise of this right is the King’s Prerogative; and, whilst it is
regulated by the laws, the King can do no wrong in such exercise.
7. The Laws are either unwritten, that is, rules of government
immemorially admitted and approved; or written, that is, ordinances of the
Parliament.
8. The privileges of the people are the right of having conjunctively, by
their representatives, one third part of the sovereign legislative power, and
of enjoying separately the protection and benefit of the laws.
9. The kingdom of Great Britain has, belonging to and depending
upon it, divers external dominions and countries; all which, together with

Great Britain, form the British Empire. Let, therefore, the British Empire
signify the aggregate body of the British dominions, and the Kingdom of
Great Britain the island which is the seat of the government.
10. The King in Parliament, is the sole and absolute Sovereign of the
whole British Empire.
11. No members of the British Empire, other than the Parliament of
Great Britain, can have a right to interfere in the exercise of this
Sovereignty, but by being admitted into the Parliament, as Wales, Chester,
and Durham have been, and Ireland may be.
12. Such an union is not necessary to the generality of the British
external dominions; but it may be expedient with most of them.
13. The external British dominions, without such an union, are
subordinate to and dependent upon the Kingdom of Great Britain, and must
derive from thence all their powers of legislation and jurisdiction.
14. Legislation is not necessary to an external and dependent
government; jurisdiction is necessary and essential to it. Therefore,
15. A separate Legislation is not an absolute right of British subjects
residing out of the seat of Empire; it may or may not be allowed, and has or
has not been granted, according to the circumstances of the community.
16. Where it is granted or allowed, it must be exercised in
subordination to the Sovereign power from whom it is derived.
17. No grant of the power of Legislation to a dependent government,
whether it comes from the King alone, or from the Parliament, can preclude
the Parliament of Great Britain from interfering in such dependent
government, at such time and in such manner as they shall think fit.
Because,
18. Though the King can do acts to bind himself and his successors, he
cannot bind the Parliament; nor can the Parliament bind their successors,

nor even themselves.
19. It is the King’s prerogative to provide for the administration of
justice in general, according to law.
20. In places to which the ordinary administration of justice does not
extend, the King has a right to make extraordinary provision for it, so that
such provision be as conformable to the laws as the case will permit.
Nevertheless,
21. It is the right of the Parliament, by its supreme power of legislation
and superintendency, to adjust and settle finally the powers and modes of
jurisdiction. Therefore,
22. The new jurisdictions established by the King, until they are
confirmed by Parliament, are only temporary provisions.
23. The King has a right to grant to private persons goods or lands
which have been acquired by, or have fallen to the general estate, so that
such grants be agreeable to law; in which case, they are presumed to be
beneficial to the community.
24. Such grants may be enquired into legally by the courts of law, and
discretionally by the Parliament; and if they shall be found to be illegal,
exorbitant, or prejudicial to the community, they may be avoided, upon a
presumption that the King was deceived.
25. A grant upon a condition performed or to be performed, is a grant
upon a valuable consideration: if the condition is performed, the grantee
becomes a purchaser for value; if it is not performed, the grant is void.
26. Jurisdiction, being a matter of public trust, and not of private
property, cannot be claimed as granted for a valuable consideration.
27. If a grantee professes to hold a jurisdiction as a property yielding
profit, he proves that he ought not to hold it; as the profit must arise from

something or other prejudicial to the public; for whose sake only
jurisdictions are or ought to be created or exercised.
28. Where the King grants jurisdiction and lands in one grant, they are
in law two separate grants, as they are to be judged by separate and distinct
principles; and the grant of the one may be valid, and of the other void or
voidable.
29. The rule that a British subject shall not be bound by laws, or liable
to taxes, but what he has consented to by his representatives, must be
confined to the inhabitants of Great Britain only; and is not strictly true
even there.
30. The Parliament of Great Britain, as well from its rights of
Sovereignty as from occasional exigences, has a right to make laws for, and
impose taxes upon, its subjects in its external dominions, although they are
not represented in such Parliament. But,
31. Taxes imposed upon the external dominions ought to be applied to
the use of the people, from whom they are raised.
32. The Parliament of Great Britain has a right and a duty to take care
to provide for the defence of the American colonies; especially as such
colonies are unable to defend themselves.
33. The Parliament of Great Britain has a right and a duty to take care
that provision be made for a sufficient support of the American
governments. Because,
34. The support of the Government is one of the principal conditions
upon which a colony is allowed the power of Legislation. Also, because
35. Some of the American Colonies have shewn themselves deficient
in the support of their several Governments, both as to sufficiency and
independency.

36. The Colonies ought, so far as they are able, to pay the charge of the
support of their own Governments, and of their own defence.
37. The defence of the American Colonies, being now almost wholly a
sea service, is connected with the defence of trade. Therefore,
38. Duties upon imports and exports, make the most proper funds for
the expences of such defence. And
39. It being the proper business of the Parliament of Great Britain, to
establish and determine the necessary regulations and restrictions of the
trade of their external dominions; and the duties upon the American imports
and exports being interwove with the regulations and restrictions of trade,
the imposition of such Duties is, the proper business of the Parliament.
40. The port duties being most properly applicable to the defence of
the Colonies, it remains that the support of the Governments be provided
for by internal duties.
41. The fund for the defence of the country, and those for the support
of the Governments, should be kept separate; because the former relates to
the general whole of the country, and the latter to the particular divisions of
it.
42. The fund for the defence of the country should be kept entire,
because it must be applied to the defence of such parts as shall have most
need of it, without any regard to the particular divisions of the country.
43. The several funds for the support of the Governments ought to be
kept separate: otherwise money, raised by internal taxes in one Province,
may be applied to the support of the Government of another; which seems
not to be equitable.
44. Although the right of the Parliament of Great Britain, to raise
taxes in any parts of the British Empire, is not to be disputed; yet it would

be most adviseable to leave to the Provincial Legislatures the raising the
internal taxes.
45. If the sums required were fixed, there would be no inconvenience
in letting the Provincial Legislature determine the manner in which they
shall be raised.
46. It will be more agreeable to the people, that the necessary internal
taxes should be raised by the Provincial Legislatures; as they will be most
able to consult the particular convenience of their respective provinces.
Whereas,
47. It may be difficult to form a general Parliamentary tax, so as to
make it equally suitable to all Provinces.
48. It would make it more agreeable to the people; though the sum to
be raised was prescribed, to leave the method of taxation to their own
Legislature.
49. If the Provincial Legislatures should refuse to raise the sums
required for the support of Government, or should insist upon doing it by
improper means, the Parliament might then take the business into their own
hands.
50. But it is most probable that the people would acquiesce in this
measure, and would soon be reconciled to it, when they observed the good
effects of a certain and adequate establishment for the support of
Government. For
51. The want of such an establishment has had bad consequences in
many of the Governments of the American colonies, and has contributed
more than all other things put together, to contention in the legislature, and
defect of justice in the courts of law. Therefore,
52. The establishment of a certain, sufficient, and independent Civil
List, is not only expedient, but necessary to the welfare of the American

Colonies.
53. Such an appointment will tend greatly to remove all the seeds of
contention, and to promote a lasting harmony and good understanding
between the Government and the People.
54. The People of the colonies ought not to object to such an
appointment, because the support of Government is one of the terms upon
which they have received the power of Legislation; and, if the Government
is not supported, the Legislation must cease: and because
55. The Support of Government ought to be certain and sufficient;
otherwise the execution of it will be uncertain, and its powers insufficient
for its purposes.
56. The Government ought not to be dependent upon the people; and
the particular means used in some of the Colonies to keep their
Governments dependent, and the use which has been made of such
dependency, afford ample proofs that they ought not to be so.
57. The right of a people in a Legislative Colony, to judge of the
expediency of extraordinary and contingent expences, does not conclude for
the same right as to the ordinary and necessary expences; because
58. The former must be ever uncertain, the latter may be reduced to a
certainty; the one concerns the welfare only of the colony, the other the very
existence as a separate state.
59. The subjects of the British Empire, residing in its external
dominions, are intitled to all the rights and privileges of British subjects,
which they are capable of enjoying.
60. There are some rights and privileges which the British subjects, in
the external dominions, are not equally capable of enjoying with those
residing in Great Britain.

61. The right of having a share in the Imperial Legislature, is one of
these incapacities in those external dominions, where a representation is
impracticable.
62. A Representation of the American Colonies in the Imperial
Legislature is not impracticable: and therefore
63. The propriety of a Representation of the American Colonies in the
Imperial Legislature, must be determined by expediency only.
64. A Representation of the American Colonies, in the Imperial
Legislature, is not necessary to establish the authority of the Parliament
over the Colonies. But
65. It may be expedient for quieting disputes concerning such
authority, and preventing a separation in future times.
66. The expediency of American Legislatures, does not arise from the
want of their having Representatives in the Imperial Legislature.
67. If the American Colonies had Representatives in Parliament, still
there would be an occasion for provincial Legislatures for their domestic
œconomy, and the support of their Governments. But
68. All external Legislatures must be subject to, and dependent on, the
Imperial Legislature: otherwise there would be an Empire in an Empire.
69. Some external States are incapable of a Legislature; which has
often been the case of infant Colonies. Therefore,
70. The same form of Government is not equally proper to a Colony in
its infant and in its mature state.
71. There may be a middle state between infancy and maturity, which
may admit of a form of Government more proper for it than either of the
extremes.
72. There is but one most perfect form of Government for Provinces
arrived at maturity.

73. That is the most perfect form of Government for a dependent
province, which approaches the nearest to that of the sovereign state, and
differs from it as little as possible.
74. There is no such form of Government among the American
Colonies. And therefore
75. Every American Government is capable of having its Constitution
altered for the better.
76. The Grants of the powers of Governments to American colonies by
charters, cannot be understood to be intended for other than their infant or
growing states.
77. They cannot be intended for their mature state, that is, for
perpetuity; because they are in many things unconstitutional and contrary to
the very nature of a British Government. Therefore,
78. They must be considered as designed only as temporary means, for
settling and bringing forward the peopling the colonies; which being
effected, the cause of the peculiarity of their constitution ceases.
79. If the Charters can be pleaded against the authority of Parliament,
they amount to an alienation of the dominions of Great Britain, and are, in
effect, acts of dismembering the British Empire, and will operate as such, if
care is not taken to prevent it.
80. To make the Government of a Province the most perfect, it is
necessary to regard the Extension as well as the Constitution of it.
81. A Province should be so extended, that the honourable support of
the Government should not be burthensome; and so confined, that the
assembling the Legislature may not be inconvenient.
82. Where the Legislature can meet without inconvenience, the larger a
Province is, the more effectual will be the powers of its Government.

83. The notion which has heretofore prevailed, that the dividing
America into many governments, and different modes of government, will
be the means to prevent their uniting to revolt, is ill-founded; since, if the
Governments were ever so much consolidated, it will be necessary to have
so many distinct States, as to make an union to revolt impracticable.
Whereas,
84. The splitting America into many small governments, weakens the
governing power, and strengthens that of the people; and thereby makes
revolting more probable and more practicable.
85. To prevent revolts in future times (for there is no room to fear them
in the present) the most effectual means would be, to make the governments
large and respectable, and balance the powers of them.
86. There is no Government in America at present, whose powers are
properly balanced; there not being in any of them a real and distinct third
Legislative power mediating between the King and the People, which is the
peculiar excellence of the British Constitution.
87. The want of such a third Legislative power, adds weight to the
popular, and lightens the royal scale: so as to destroy the balance between
the royal and popular powers.
88. Although America is not now (and probably will not be for many
years to come) ripe enough for an hereditary Nobility; yet it is now capable
of a Nobility for life.
89. A Nobility appointed by the King for life, and made independent,
would probably give strength and stability to the American governments, as
effectually as an hereditary Nobility does to that of Great Britain.
90. The reformation of the American governments should not be
controlled by the present boundaries of the colonies; as they were mostly

settled upon partial, occasional, and accidental considerations, without any
regard to a whole.
91. To settle the American governments to the greatest possible
advantage, it will be necessary to reduce the number of them; in some
places to unite and consolidate; in others to separate and transfer; and in
general to divide by natural boundaries instead of imaginary lines.
92. If there should be but one form of Government established for all
the North American Provinces, it would greatly facilitate the reformation of
them: since, if the mode of Government was every where the same, people
would be more indifferent under what division they were ranged.
93. No objections ought to arise to the alteration of the boundaries of
provinces from Proprietors, on account of their property only; since there is
no occasion that it should in the least affect the boundaries of properties.
94. The present distinctions of one government being more free or
more popular than another, tend to embarrass and to weaken the whole; and
should not be allowed to subsist among people, subject to one King and one
Law, and all equally fit for one form of Government.
95. The American colonies, in general, are at this time arrived at that
state, which qualifies them to receive the most perfect form of government,
which their situation and relation to Great Britain make them capable of.
96. The people of North America, at this time, expect a revisal and
reformation of the American Governments, and are better disposed to
submit to it than ever they were, or perhaps ever will be again.
97. This is therefore the proper and critical time to reform the
American governments upon a general, constitutional, firm, and durable
plan; and if it is not done now, it will probably every day grow more
difficult, till at last it becomes impracticable.
