PAMPHLET 10
[William Hicks], The Nature and Extent of Parliamentary
Power Considered; in Some Remarks upon Mr. Pitt’s Speech in
the House of Commons, Previous to the Repeal of the StampAct: with an Introduction, Applicable to the Present Situation
of the Colonies. Philadelphia, 1768.
On January 14, 1766, William Pitt, the “Great Commoner” and the minister most responsible for
Britain’s winning the Seven Years War, gave an impassioned speech in Parliament in opposition to
the Stamp Act. It ought to be “repealed absolutely, totally, and immediately;” he insisted, because “it
was founded on an erroneous principle.” Parliament, Pitt said, had no right to take money out of the
colonists’ pockets. Not only did Pitt defend the Americans’ claim that they could not be taxed
without their consent, he even rejoiced that they had resisted. Couldn’t the British government, he
asked, understand the “plain distinction between taxes levied for the purpose of raising a revenue,
and duties imposed for the regulation of trade”?
The speech was widely printed in the colonies and made him an American hero all over again. But
as William Hicks pointed out in a series of essays originally published in the Pennsylvania Journal
early in 1768 and reprinted in newspapers in Boston and South Carolina before being collected in this
pamphlet, Pitt had revealed “a striking inconsistency” in his speech. While Parliament could not tax
the colonies, Pitt had claimed that it had “a right to bind, to restrain America” and that its “legislative
power over the colonies is sovereign and supreme.” Indeed, Pitt felt Parliament was more than
justified in suspending the New York Assembly over its refusal to comply with the Quartering Act of
1765, an action that had deeply troubled leaders throughout the colonies.
How could this inconsistency be understood? Could the colonists really be subordinate to “the two
inferior estates of their mother country,” that is, to the House of Lords and the House of Commons?
Shouldn’t they instead be “considered as so many different countries of the same kingdom”? Like
many other Americans, Hicks was fumbling to find some way “through the labyrinth of our present
dispute.” How could Parliament, as Pitt claimed, bind the trade of the colonists, confine their
manufactures, and exercise every power whatsoever over them, except tax them? Could Parliament

be limited and yet unlimited at the same time? The Great Commoner did not have an answer to these
questions, and it seemed no one else did either.

INTRODUCTION.
NUMBER I.

T

following piece was written but a short time before the repeal of
the stamp-act; and as the subject of it was of the most general and
HE

important nature, the trifling alteration of circumstances which a few
months have produced, cannot prevent its being as applicable to the present
state of our affairs, as to those disagreeable controversies, in which we have
been heretofore unhappily involved. The conciliating spirit which prevaled
upon the first intelligence of the stamp-act’s being repealed, prevented its
publication then; though the author was ever perfectly convinced, the
colonies would not long have any reason to flatter themselves, that the
repeal of this act was a sacrifice to liberty; or that it proceeded from any
thing more than an apprehension of the ill consequences which our brethren
of Britain must have felt from the œconomical resolutions which we had
formed. Upon examining the debates, previous to the repeal, if any one
could have doubted the sense of the legislature, the act for securing the
dependence of the colonies, would have reduced it to a sufficient degree of
certainty. Indeed, if this act had been more equivocal, the billeting act was
explicit enough to have pointed out clearly to every common understanding,
their generous meaning—A meaning evidenced by such measures as could
not but excite the most alarming apprehensions.
In mixt forms of government, where the delicacy of the constitution
requires the strictest attention, to the movements of each distinct part,
jealous fears frequently intervene, upon the slightest appearance of
irregularity. The history of England, alone, will furnish us with facts

sufficient to support this assertion; since every man who possesses the
smallest share of historical knowledge must certainly have observed, that
before any measure of importance could obtain the necessary approbation
of the three estates of the kingdom, it first passed a severe and critical
examination; lest a superior address in either of the parties interested,
should give them some particular advantage—lest a designing minister
should extend the prerogative of the crown, or an artful commoner increase
the liberty of the subject. A few thousands added to the military list, have
alarmed the whole nation; and a body of troops, not equal to those upon the
American establishment, have with the most terrible apprehensions, been
considered as a formidable army,—so averse have the people of England
ever been, to trust their liberties, even with the best of men, that they have
chosen to depend upon the precarious aid of subsidiary troops, rather than
put arms into the hands of their own countrymen: while there was the least
probability that those arms might be employed to the subversion of liberty.
This conduct, I only mean to remark as consistent with the genius of liberty:
and, though its policy, when critically examined, may not appear altogether
unexceptionable, yet will the jealous caution which produced it, be ever
considered as the grand bulwark of freedom. When I apply myself to
consider the situation of the colonists, I cannot but observe that they labour
under difficulties peculiar to themselves. They have not only to guard their
liberties against the encroachments of the royal prerogative, but even to
protect their property against the invasions of their more powerful brethren.
The people of England have only one single defence to make for the
preservation of their freedom; and, if the system of venality and corruption,
which now so generally prevails, does not gradually lead them into a state
of slavery, no open violence can ever effect it. Far different is the situation
of the divided Americans. Of them every distinct colony has hitherto been

considered as a particular plantation of the crown, and been governed by
such loose, discretionary powers as were better calculated to support the
despotism of a minister than the liberties of the settlers. They are now
considered as dangerous rivals, and their unprotected interests must fall a
sacrifice to those of their jealous brethren. An artful, designing minister
would naturally endeavour to conciliate the affections of those who more
immediately surround the throne, by removing any burthens from their
shoulders, and fixing them upon those, by whose murmers and complaints,
he could not be so immediately affected. To gratify the desires of his selfish
countrymen, and flatter them with the appearance of an unnatural
superiority; he would willingly subscribe to any acts for the limiting our
trade, and restraining our manufactures: But perfectly convinced that the
Americans will neither be so stupid as not to perceive the iniquity of these
measures, nor so passive as patiently to submit to their being carried into
execution, he prudently prepares to support them by means as infamous and
oppressive as those which are to be supported. Though our European
neighbours are driven from the continent; and, though our savage enemies
have long since laid down the hatchet, yet have our careful guardians left us
a very considerable body of troops, and are daily sending over fresh
supplies—to protect us from any future dangers; when it cannot but be
evident to every man of common knowledge, that, in our present situation,
we are both able and willing to defend our own frontiers, without putting
the government to the trouble of transporting troops for that purpose, at
such an immense expence. We have now sixteen regiments distributed
through the different colonies.—most of them, instead of being a defence to
our frontiers, are a burthen to our maritime cities; where they are, by virtue
of an act of the British parliament, to be plentifully supplied with
necessaries at the expence of the place where they may be quartered; and as

the quartering them depends altogether upon the arbitrary will of the
commanding officer, he is absolutely vested with a power of oppressing any
single colony, which may have been so unfortunate as to have incurred the
resentment of those who appointed him.
When the ministry resolved to burthen us with so many troops, it was
not thought proper to make the usual requisitions to the different assemblies
for the necessary supplies. The power of parliament had met with an
unexpected opposition, in their first attempts to enforce the stamp-act.
Urged by a prudent attention to their own interests, they had indeed
determined to repeal this oppressive act; but, least this extraordinary
concession should be considered as an acknowledgement of right, they
determined to exert their authority once more in a manner so explicit, as
should leave us no room to doubt their meaning.
One act is passed to declare the dependence of the colonies upon the
imperial crown and parliament of Great-Britain; and that dependence is
immediately proved by a law for billeting soldiers in America, and for
obliging those places, in which the commanding officer may think proper to
quarter them, to grant certain very ample supplies of necessaries. Upon
application to the government of New-York, the general assembly of that
province shewed their readiness to comply with every thing that might be
required for the accommodation of those troops which had contributed to
the valuable acquisitions in America. They framed a law for the purpose,
and granted a sufficiency of such articles as they conceived most useful and
necessary for the soldiers: They did not indeed comply with every particular
contained in the act of parliament—perhaps it might not be in their power.
If any thing was to be given by the colonists for the accommodation of the
soldiery, surely they were the best judges of their own abilities, as well as of
those articles which they could most conveniently procure. If the parliament

had thought proper to have ordered porter instead of small beer, and gin
instead of rum, they would scarcely have procured a sufficient quantity, had
they even sought it with fixt bayonets. Although the inhabitants could not
but be alarmed at a requisition supported by the whole legislative authority,
yet did they prudently decline taking notice of such an extraordinary
procedure, and very modestly resolved to comply with the design of the act
without any immediate referrence to the act itself. Some triffling alterations
were indeed made in the stipulated allowances; but so inconsiderable were
they that I believe the soldiery complained but little of the alteration; and I
cannot think that the greatest enemy to America ever imagined that the
freemen of New-York, when they used a discretionary power in granting a
share of their own private property, for the use of the army, and were hardy
enough to deviate, in some minute particulars, from the directions of the
British parliament, would ever have excited so violent—so unjustifiable a
resentment. A resentment expressed by a proceeding the most unreasonable
and unconstitutional—such a proceeding as must prove, beyond all
possibility of contradiction, that whatever concessions we may receive from
a prudent attachment to their own interest, we can expect nothing from a
generous attention to the spirit of their own happy constitution, or from an
honest reluctance to invade the natural rights of their fellow subjects.
—Sed comprime motus
Nec tibi quid liceat, sed quid fecissæ decebit
Occurrat, mentemque domet respectus honesti.
CLAUD.

NUMBER II.

MR. PITT has frequently declared that the freemen of Great-Britain have no
right to take money out of our pockets, without first obtaining our consent;
and yet their representatives in parliament have resolved, without deigning
to consult us, that we shall pay a certain sum for furnishing the soldiery
with particular necessaries. Unwilling to revive a contest, which had just
before been settled so much to our satisfaction, we declined renewing the
dispute with regard to the legality of the act. We were contented to receive
it as a reasonable requisition, though not as a binding law; and, consulting
our own abilities and convenience, we granted such articles as we thought
would answer the design of the act. In this conduct, so remarkably
temperate, we have incurred the highest displeasure of the British
parliament, and are exposed, as a punishment due to our offences, to one of
the most general, and severest penalties which the hand of power could
inflict. An act has passed to strip us of our legislative power, and render us
unable to provide for ourselves in a situation of the most imminent danger;
because we have outrageously refused to subscribe to our own ruin. We
have modestly avoided controverting a point of the highest importance, lest
we should draw upon ourselves a charge of obstinacy and malevolence. We
have complyed with the meaning, though not with the letter of the act. We
have evidenced the most grateful and complying disposition, and are
nevertheless doomed to receive the punishment of the most rebelious
opposition. If our every act is thus liable to be misconstrued, and we are
patiently to receive such severe chastisement, we must at once renounce the
name of free-men, and accommodate ourselves to a state of abject
vassallage.
We may not, perhaps, just now feel any immediate ill consequences
from this restraint upon our legislation; but, when we are to determine upon
the propriety or justice of any particular act, we are to consider all the

effects which it may probably, or even possibly produce. Suppose (for
instance) that our savage neighbours should once more wantonly invade our
frontiers—to what a horrid situation should we be reduced! Our lives and
fortunes exposed to the attacks of a barbarous enemy, without our being
able to raise either men or money for our protection. Can the greatest
enemy to America think of our being reduced to a situation so truly
distressful, without accusing of the most unnatural severity, those who
arrogate to themselves an absolute power of directing and restraining our
every action, in such a manner as may best answer their own partial
purposes? In this amazing exertion of parliamentary power, the single
colony of New-York is not alone concerned. It may hereafter be the fate of
every other province, unless they now cordially unite in such an application
as may confirm their liberty, or establish their subordination upon some
regular principles.
I am no favourer of violent measures. I would endeavour to support
our pretensions by force of reasoning, not by force of arms; but yet I would
anxiously wish that nothing may intimidate us into an acquiescence with the
measures of oppression. We may be compelled to submit, but never to
relinquish our claim to the privileges of the free men.
When we complain of the violent proceedings in the late
administrations; let us consider the alterations which a century has
produced in our constitution. We have now a standing army of one hundred
and twenty regiments. Scarce a family of rank but what has some military
connections; and even in the house of commons there are too many
gentlemen of the sword. No wonder then that we are alarmed with such
spirited resolves—that execution is to proceed judgment; and that the
inhabitants of a colony are regarded as dependant vassals, by those who
have been accustomed to consider a legion of free subjects, as a band of

absolute slaves—points of honor now take place of points in law, and
Magna-Charta itself must give way to that furor militaris which so
universally prevails. The hand which bestows a truncheon can never be
guilty of oppression, and the will of an artful minister will become the law
of a whole nation.
I am no enemy to the present military establishment, but as I conceive
it may influence and endanger our liberties; nor have I any resentment
against the inhabitants of that country, which gave birth to my ancestors,
but when I consider them as exerting their superior power to reduce their
fellow subjects to a state of subordination inconsistent with their natural
rights, and not to be reconciled to the spirit of their own constitution. I
admire and revere the well regulated government of Great-Britain, and only
wish to have our own system established by so excellent a standard.
As a colonist, my most ambitious views extend no further than the
rights of a British subject. I can not comprehend how my being born in
America should divest me of these; nor can I conceive why the liberty and
property of a free-born American should not be protected from every
invasion with the same caution, which has ever been exerted to guard the
privileges of an englishman. If we are entitled to the liberties of British
subjects we ought to enjoy them unlimited and unrestrained. If our
pretensions to these are without any foundation, why are we left
unacquainted with the cause and nature of our subordination. In acts of the
greatest solemnity and notoriety, we have been flattered with the title of
British subjects—we have received with the blood of our ancestors, the
spirit of liberty, and our hearts naturally retain an utter abhorrence of
slavery. We have carefully examined those glorious charters, granted to the
virtuous resolution of our brave fore-fathers; and the result of our
examination can not but inform us—that liberty is only to be supported by a

steady opposition to the first advances of arbitrary power. The conduct of
the colonists has been most maliciously misrepresented, and they have been
stigmatized as riotous and rebellious, when those who are un-influenced by
prejudice, can not but discover that their warmest wishes rise no higher than
to a connection, founded upon natural right; and that their present
resentment could only be excited by the horrid apprehensions of being
reduced to a state of slavish dependance.
I am not so great a stickler for the independance of the colonies, but I
am ready to acknowledge the necessity of lodging in some part of the
community a restraining power, for the regulating and limiting the trade
and manufactures of each particular county or colony, in such a manner as
might most effectually promote the good of the whole; and I should not
obstinately object to the vesting this power in the parliament of GreatBritain, if the violent measures which have lately been carried into
execution, did not afford me too much reason to believe, that every
concession which might at this time be made from a principle of necessity,
and a regard to the public utility, would be immediately considered as an
acknowledgment of such a subordination, as is totally inconsistent with the
nature of our constitution. If a laudable motive of moderation, and a
generous attention to the welfare and tranquility of the whole community
should induce a ready submission to every regulation which the British
parliament may think necessary to frame, the ill consequences which may
possibly attend such a temperate conduct may draw upon us a charge of
unpardonable negligence. In a system so complicated as ours, where one
power is continually encroaching upon the other, and where the general
ballance is so fluctuating and precarious, a spirit of compliance and
moderation in the present age, may lay a foundation for the slavery and
dependance of future generations; who will have the greatest reason to

charge us with having basely betrayed their liberties, by carelessly relaxing
from the rigid scrutiny which ever ought to be made into matters of national
concern.
Vos dormitis, nec adhuc mihi videmini intelligere
quam nos pateamus.
Cal. ad Cic.

NUMBER III.
IN the pursuit of all political measures, if we are not cautious in preserving
the appearance of liberty, we may insensibly lose the reality itself. As men
attentive to our own particular interests, we cannot but discover the many
advantages which the colonists would necessarily have over their brethren
of Britain, in the course of a free, uninterrupted commerce; but, as men of
reason and integrity, we do not indulge a wish to enjoy these advantages at
the expence of our fellow subjects. We shall ever readily subscribe to such
commercial regulations as may enable the inhabitants of Great-Britain and
Ireland to meet us at all foreign markets upon an equal footing; but WHERE
the authority by which these restrictions are to be framed, can with most
safety and propriety be lodged is now the subject of our inquiries.
The boldest advocates for the power of parliament, can not, at this day,
without blushing, assert, that it is sovereign and supreme in every respect
whatsoever. That great man, who is, beyond all contradiction, the best
acquainted with the constitution of his own country, and the most sincerely
attached to her true interest, never wished to extend the legislative power of
Britain, any further, than might be essential to her own preservation; by
establishing such regulations as were indispensably necessary to prevent her
falling a prey to her rising colonies. As there was an immediate necessity of

placing this power somewhere, the parliament of Great Britain could urge a
claim founded in an appearance of reason, and supported by a superiority
of strength; and yet, reasonable as this claim appeared to be, it could never
be maintained, upon the principles of their own government. The commons
of Britain might indeed with great propriety propose regulations for the
trade, and restrictions for the manufactures of those by whom they were
appointed; but how they can, with any face of equity resolve to extend these
regulations and restrictions to those from whom they have received no
delegated power, is what I cannot easily comprehend. Would they but admit
to their general council a certain number of deputies, properly authorized
from every colony, to support the interests of their constituents, to explain
the nature of their situation, and remonstrate against any acts of oppression,
then indeed, whatever commercial regulations they might think proper to
form, would be fixed upon a constitutional basis, and their authority remain
for ever undisputed; as I can never be supposed to mean that it should
extend to any other than such matters which immediately relate to
commerce; while the internal policy of each colony should still be regulated
by it’s proper representatives, in conjunction with the deputy of the crown?
and their liberty should only be restrained and their property fairly disposed
of by those who are legally vested with that authority. I am very sensible,
that to fix a representation in parliament for the purposes of commerce only,
would be attended with many inconveniencies; but every man who has the
cause of liberty, and the interest of his country at heart, would rather accept
such a partial, disadvantageous establishment as might immediately be
obtained, than submit to such an unnatural state of subordination, as must
continually keep alive the spirit of contention, and finally involve us in
inevitable ruin.

The friends of parliamentary power lose themselves in contemplating
the idol they have raised; and to confirm the veneration which they have
entertained, they annex to it the idea of omnipotence and infallibility. It is a
received maxim of the law—“that the king can do no wrong”; and yet our
brave forefathers were not so deluded by this royal dogma as to suffer
themselves to be stripped of their invaluable rights and privileges by the
arbitrary fiat of a wicked Prince; and if they were justifiable in their resolute
opposition to the unwarrantable encroachments of a power which had been
considered as sacred, by a long hereditary succession; how very reasonably
may we conceive that our conduct will be strictly defensible when we
unanimously oppose the violent proceedings of a body which we may be
said, from day to day, to have fashioned with our own hands. As the
original design of delegating power, was, that it might be exercised for the
good of the whole community, there cannot be a greater absurdity in politics
than to suppose that those whom we have vested with a reasonable and
necessary authority, are not accountable to us if they should, by any
consideration, be led weakly and wantonly to abuse it. The doctrine of non
resistance and passive obedience to the tyranic will of a wicked Prince has
long since been exploded, and those who have endeavoured to inculcate
these slavish principles have deservedly been treated with the utmost rigor
of the law.1 If liberty be the object which we pursue, and slavery the
misfortune which we most cautiously avoid, we have as much to apprehend
from a corrupt parliament, as from an ambitious king; and he who would
patiently submit to the usurpations of the one and resolutely oppose the
despotism of the other, only declares, by his conduct, that he would rather
be ruled by five hundred tyrants than by one.
The natural right which every man possesses, to restrain, by every
possible method, the progress of arbitrary, lawless government, is not at this

day to be controverted; and, tho’ it may be insinuated that the too warmly
and too frequently pressing this doctrine may excite a spirit of
licentiousness, yet, in answer to this, I must beg leave to remark, that the
cause of liberty cannot be too carefully cultivated, and that those principles
by which it is best supported cannot be too often or too strongly inculcated.
Should the parliament of Britain by any act of power, attempt to strip their
constituents of some important, unalienable right, would they not meet with
as certain and violent opposition, as if the crown, by an exertion of its
prerogative should endeavour to divest them of some established privilege.
The king of Great-Britain is vested with an extensive, but not an unlimited
authority; and is himself bound by those laws with the execution of which
he is intrusted. The representatives of the nation, in parliament assembled,
with justice arrogate to themselves many great and useful powers. They are
trustees lawfully appointed for the freemen of Great-Britain—ne quid
detrimenti capiat respublica is the tenure of their appointment; and, if they
should, from any principle of venality or corruption, betray their important
trust, no man can doubt but that they are very reasonably accountable to
their constituents for every part of their misconduct. Should an act of the
British legislature invade the rights of those who cloathed the lawmakers
with their legislative power it could only be considered as a breach of trust;
but if the same authority should be exerted to deprive us of our most
inestimable liberties, we must very properly regard it as an act of violence
and oppression. Such violence has lately been offered to the legislature of
New-York in particular, and such oppression will with great reason be
complained of by the colonies in general, when they more clearly discover
the ill tendency of those statutes which have lately been framed under a
pretence of regulating our commerce. I cannot think it necessary to enter
into a minute examination of every particular statute. The nature and

importance of those duties which have been imposed upon such articles as
we are under a necessity of importing from Great-Britain only, have been
very clearly and accurately explained by a late judicious writer.2 For my
part I have only laboured to impress the principles of liberty upon the minds
of my countrymen; and to draw from those principles such clear and
forcible conclusions as might carry with them conviction even to the most
prejudiced. I have left the arrangement and consideration of particular facts
to those who have more leisure and ability; but if this loose, undigested
essay, should, in the most trifling degree, promote the interest of my
country, I shall, at any time hereafter, most willingly devote my head, my
heart and my hand to the same glorious purpose.
Te propter colimus leges, animosque ferarum
Exuimus; nitidis quisquis te sensibus hausit
Irruet intrepidus flammis, hiberna secabit
Æquora: consertos hostes superabit inermis.
CLAUD.
A CITIZEN.
1Vide

Sacheverel’s trial.

2Author

of the Farmer’s letters.

The Nature and Extent of Parliamentary Power
Considered, &c.
“Those laws therefore that I call Leges scriptæ, are such as are
usually called statute laws, which are originally reduced into
writing, before they are enacted, or receive any binding power;
every such law being formally made, as it were, an INDENTURE
TRIPARTITE, between the King, the Lords, and the Commons; for
without the concurrent consent of all these three parts no such
law is or can be made.”
HALE’s Hist. of the Common Law.

NUMBER I.

I

seems to me the distinguishing characteristic of the English
constitution that no free man shall be restrained in the exercise of his
natural liberty, or, in the use of his acquired property but by those
regulations to which he has really or virtually subscribed. Laws which are
T

the result of such a rational and well-digested compact, may bear hard upon
some, but they cannot, with propriety, be complained of by any; since every
precaution which the wit of man could devise, was necessarily employed
for the benefit of the whole united body, after a due attention to the separate
interest of each.
The Lords and Commons, with the approbation of the Crown, agree to
regulate their trade by well-placed restrictions, and settle the establishment
of their manufactures in such a manner as shall be most conducive to the
public good. In all these disposing and restraining laws the interest of the

whole community is consulted, and the spirit of the constitution preserved
inviolate.
But, when the Lords and Commons of England, by formal compact
with the Crown, attempt to bind those, who can by no means be considered
as parties to their agreement, they discard those noble principles to which
they owe the enjoyment of all that is valuable in life, and introduce power
in the place of reason to support a system which has its foundation in
partial, not in universal good. For, can any thing be more evidently partial,
or more inconsistent with the principles of common justice, than that the
Lords and Commons of England should give and grant 3 to his Majesty any
sum which they may think proper, to be levied, by any mode which they
may be pleased to devise, upon his American subjects—perhaps for the
payment of a subsidy to some Prince of the Empire for the defence of his
Majesty’s electoral dominions. If the absurdity and injustice of such a
procedure is to be discovered by every eye, we shall not be long before we
clearly perceive, through all the mists of ingenious sophistry, that, upon the
indispensible principles of their own constitution, the Lords and Commons
of England can no more covenant with the Crown for the limiting and
restraining our natural liberty than they can agree to give and grant the
most valuable of our property to be disposed of for their own private
purposes.
The more I consider this maxim, which I have taken from my Lord C.
Justice Hale, the more sensible am I of its weight and importance. To
perceive its full force, it will be necessary to look back to the first dawn of
freedom, when the good people of England, would no longer submit to
have their liberty and property arbitrarily disposed of by the royal fiat.
Conscious of their own importance, they, at first, only claimed a privilege
of recommending by petition, such measures as they might conceive

necessary for the public good. In this humble form did the spirit of liberty
first appear, while the power of the crown continued for ages almost
unlimited in its extent, and uncontrouled in its operation. But, when an
attention to the true interests of the nation, established their manufactures
and extended their commerce, the common people readily shook off their
servile dependence upon their Lords, and gladly embraced an opportunity
of acquiring that affluence of riches which was the firmest foundation of
their future liberty. Those, whose situation had lately been that of the most
abject vassallage, now suddenly found themselves raised, by their own
industry, to the possession of wealth and independence. Proud of such
valuable and important acquisitions, they only waited for that information,
which was the child of time and experience, to direct their steps in the
pursuit of measures which were to establish the most solid security for that
liberty and property which they had so lately acquired.
Before science extended her happy influence over this rising nation,
their progress in the paths of liberty was but slow and irregular—interrupted
by events which they were too short sighted to foresee, and obstructed by
revolutions which no human prudence could prevent. But, when their
acquisition of knowledge, from a careful examination of the past, enabled
them not only to regulate the present, but even to penetrate into the remote
regions of future contingency, every revolving year furnished them with
some opportunity to improve and enlarge their system of liberty. With every
assistance which human wisdom could bestow, supported by the experience
of ages, they have at last fixed the foundation of their freedom upon such
principles as will forever stand the test of the most critical examination.
Careful to guard those blessings for which they had so industriously
laboured, they established this as a fundamental maxim—that no new
regulation could be framed, nor any old law abrogated but by the general

consent of the nation. Such a consent as must be evidenced by a majority of
votes in the different estates of the kingdom—the Lords in their proper
persons assenting, while the sense of the common people is known from the
voices of their representatives. Can any thing less than infinite wisdom
elaborate a system more perfect than that which so effectually secures the
happiness of every individual—which admits no law as obligatory but upon
those who are expressly parties, or have actually subscribed to the
obligation?
If these be, as they certainly are, the well digested principles of the
English constitution, with what appearance of reason can the warmest
zealot for the superiority of Great-Britain assert, that the legislative power
of parliament is sovereign and supreme?
Shall the freemen of New-York be reduced to a state of subordination,
and deprived of those invaluable privileges enjoyed by the inhabitants of
that city, which has given a name to their province, because they are
unfortunately placed a thousand leagues further from the presence of their
sovereign; and, instead of prefering their petitions immediately to the royal
ear, can only apply to his deputy for a redress of their grievances, and for
the framing such regulations as the infant state of the colony may require?
This would be heightening the misfortune of their situation by the most
flagrant injustice.
When the emigrants from Great-Britain crossed the Atlantic to settle
the desarts of America, they brought with them the spirit of the English
government. They brought with them the same duties to their sovereign
which the freemen of England at that time acknowledged; and they very
naturally supposed, that, under his direction, they should be allowed to
make such regulations as might answer the purposes of their emigration.
Ever mindful of their duty and allegiance to their Prince, they cannot easily

conceive that they left their brethren the freemen of England vested with a
sovereign, supreme power to restrain their natural Liberty,4 or to dispose of
their acquired property. Removed at an immense distance from the seat of
government, they could no longer join the national council; but, as the very
spirit of the English constitution required it, they naturally applied to their
Prince for such protection and assistance, as might raise them to an equality
with their brethren of England; from whom they only requested their
friendly patronage, during the weakness of their infant state.
The formula of their government once settled in some measure to their
satisfaction, with the concurrence of those officers appointed by the Crown,
the inhabitants of these new settlements, ever faithfully preserving in their
memory the principles of that happy government which they had just
quitted, totally disclaim all subordination5 to, and dependence upon, the
two inferior estates of their mother country. Without the power—without
the inclination to disturb the tranquility of those to whom they stand so
nearly related, they wish to promote an amicable intercourse, founded upon
reciprocal interest; without allowing or submitting to any laws, but those
which they themselves have made, by regular agreement with the deputy of
the Crown, properly authorized for that purpose. To suppose the British
parliament to be vested with a sovereign and supreme legislative power
over the colonies, is advancing a supposition inconsistent with the
principles of their own constitution; and to assert the necessity of
subordination from the nature of our situation, without attempting to prove
that necessity, is really treating an affair of the utmost importance with too
little attention.6 Those who may probably be most seriously affected by this
doctrine, very naturally require something stronger than general assertions
to support it, although those assertions may be advanced by the best and
wisest man of the nation.

Perhaps it may not be such an irreconcileable paradox in policy to
assert, that the freemen settled in America may preserve themselves
absolutely independant of their fellow subjects who more immediately
surround the throne, and yet discharge, with the strictest fidelity, all their
duties to their sovereign. They may not only be loyal and valuable subjects
to their Prince, but useful and necessary neighbours to their brethren of
Britain.
The colonies may, with no great impropriety, be considered as so many
different countries of the same kingdom, the nature of whose situation
prevents their joining in the general council, and reduces them to a
necessity of applying to their Prince for the establishment of such a partial
policy as may be the best adapted to their particular circumstances, and, at
the same time, the most conducive to the general good. That this partial
policy, settled for every distinct part, may not interfere with the general
welfare of the whole, the restraining power lodged in the Crown will always
be able to insure; since we cannot suppose that a wise and just Prince would
ever consent to sacrifice the interest and happiness of any one part to the
selfish views of another.
As a commercial people, while blessed with the same advantages
which the inhabitants of Great-Britain enjoy, our interest may sometimes
clash with theirs. This is an inconvenience which may, at some future
period happen, in the extent of our trade: But shall this possible
inconvenience be a sufficient authority for stripping us of all the most
valuable privileges in society? Shall we be reduced to the most abject state
of dependence, because we may possibly become formidable rivals to our
jealous brethren, if we are allowed to maintain that equality which we have
received from nature, and which we find so firmly supported by the laws of
our mother country?

Nostri autem magistratus, imperatores que ex hac una re
maximam laudem capere studebant, SI PROVINCIAS,
SI SOCIOS EQUITATE ET FIDE DEFENDERENT.

CIC. de Off.

NUMBER II.
THERE is no reasoning against those prejudices which are the support of
particular interest, or I would ask why my being born in the island of GreatBritain should vest me with a power to tie the hands of my American
neighbour, and then justify me in picking his pocket; although this same
American should be a loyal subject of the same Prince, and formally
declared to be possessed of all the liberties and privileges of a British
subject? How absurd and unmeaning must this specious declaration appear
to one who sees and feels the force of the present violent struggles for
reducing us to a state of infamous vassallage.
That right honourable and worthy gentleman who exerted his extensive
influence to ward off from the devoted colonies that blow which would
have effected their immediate ruin, has been pleased to make these
declarations in our favour—“They are the subjects of this kingdom, equally
entitled with ourselves to all the natural rights of mankind, and the peculiar
privileges of Englishmen, equally bound by the laws, and equally
participating of its constitution. The Americans are the sons, not the
bastards of England.” And yet, in the same speech he asserts the authority
of Great-Britain “over the colonies to be sovereign and supreme in every
circumstance of government and legislation whatsoever.” If the latter part of
this declaration be by any means reconcileable with the former, I must
forfeit all pretensions to reason; since, after the most careful disquisition
which I am capable of making, I cannot discover how any inhabitant of the

colonies can be said to enjoy the peculiar privileges of Englishmen, when
all that he holds valuable in life must lie at the mercy of that unlimited
power, which is so repeatedly said to be sovereign and supreme. An
authority established upon partial principles, and such as must be supported
by the force of arms7 more than the force of reason, if it is to survive any
distant period.
I have the highest veneration for the character and abilities of Mr. Pitt,
and scarcely dare indulge myself in a train of reasoning, which evidently
points out to me the most striking inconsistency in the sense of his speech
of January last upon American affairs. From the best evidence which I am
capable of receiving, I cannot but be clearly convinced that our liberty must
be only ideal, and our privileges chimerical, while the omnipotence of
parliament can “bind our trade, confine our manufactures, and exercise
every power whatever except that of taking money out of our pockets
without our consent.” If this sovereign power, which they so warmly assert,
should be once tamely conceded, to what triffling purpose have we exerted
ourselves in our glorious opposition to the stamp act. At best, we have but
put the evil day afar off—We have not combated the reality, but the mode
of oppression. We have only gained a temporary reprieve, till some future
minister, with as little virtue and more abilities than Mr. G——lle, shall
think proper to employ this unbounded legislative power for the horrid
purpose of reducing three millions of people to a state of abject slavery.
If our sovereign lords, the Commons of England, have been led, by
their absurd jealousy, and envious partiality, under the direction of a rash
and impolitic minister, to strike so bold a stroke at both our liberty and
property, what danger may we not apprehend from the same selfish
principles, when they may be influenced by the deep-laid schemes of some
able statesman? Under such pernicious influence the chains of America may

be forged and riveted on, while her incautious sons are lulled in a state of
security. The power of taxation given up to their spirited opposition, the
excess of their joy will not suffer them to indulge any gloomy reflections
upon that dangerous reserve of legislation. The present evil averted, the
warmth of their sanguine dispositions will not allow them to think that
oppression may return at any other time, or in any other form. Their very
gratitude and humility prevent their enquiring into a cause of the last
importance. In the highest exaltation of heart at a concession scarcely
expected, they receive as a matter of favour what they demanded as a
matter of right; and, to avoid an appearance of arrogance in urging any new
demands, they neglect the discharge of the most essential duties to
themselves and their posterity. Perhaps they will scarcely thank the man
who shall endeavour to convince them, that the simple power of legislation
may as effectually ruin the colonies as that of taxation.
Let us borrow and improve upon a thought of our greatest enemy. Mr.
G——lle tells us that internal and external taxes are the same in effect, and
differ but in name. Mr. Pitt has indeed treated this opinion with so little
attention, that he has only answered it by a general assertion—“that there is
a plain distinction between taxes levied for the purposes of raising a
revenue, and duties imposed for the regulation of trade.”
Plain as this distinction is, my most industrious enquiries have not yet
led me to it; and I cannot but think with Mr. G——lle, that they are the same
in effect.—The one is precisely determined, while the other is more
uncertain and eventual; but, in proportion to the sum raised, the effect will
be exactly the same. It is taken for granted that the collection of a stamp
duty would drain us of all the specie which we receive as a ballance in our
West-India trade. If an exorbitant duty laid upon sugar and molasses
produces the same effect, in what does the difference consist? By either

means the treasury of England will be enriched with the whole profit of our
labour, and we ourselves shall be reduced to that deplorable state of
poverty, of which we have, at this very moment, a most affecting instance.
General as the calamity is now become, there are few so uninformed as not
to know that the power of legislation has done all this mischief, without any
assistance from that of taxation. The severe restrictions imposed upon our
trade, have made it impracticable for us to answer every foreign demand,
and, at the same time reserve a sufficient stock to keep up that circulation of
property so necessary to the well being of society.
Involved in heavy debts, without any prospect of discharging them—in
want of the necessaries of life, without the means of acquiring them, the
very politic Mr. G——lle has furnished us with the most interesting facts to
prove the truth of his doctrine. As great an enemy as he may be to the
colonies, he has at least kindly bestowed upon them the most irrefragable
proof that internal and external taxes are the same in effect; and that they
may be as effectually ruined by the powers of legislation as by those of
taxation.
When the parliament of Great-Britain arrogate to themselves this
sovereign jurisdiction over the colonies, I should be glad to know on what
principles they found their claim. Do they ground their pretensions on the
excellent principles of their own constitution, or is this supremacy a power
virtually inherent in the name of parliament? A name which should remind
them of their original state of humility, when the distinguishing power
which they boasted was a privilege of speaking their mind and
remonstrating their grievances. The Lords indeed may, with some
appearance of reason, assert a supreme jurisdiction over the whole body of
the nation, as the highest court of judicature: But when an aspiring member
of the Commons House confidently declares that he has a power to bind our

trade, and restrain our manufactures, I should be glad to know whether he
derived this power from the honest freemen his constituents, or whether he
acquired it by virtue of his office? From his constituents he could receive no
more power than they naturally possessed; and, from his office he cannot
reasonably be supposed vested with any other authority, than that of
deciding upon the formalities, and punctilios annexed to it.
To grasp at a jurisdiction so infinitely extensive, and so little capable
of limitation, is expressly declaring, that, from the antiquity of their
establishment, they are become sovereigns of the new-discovered world.
Upon some such arbitrary principles must they ground their unreasonable
pretensions; since no man in his senses will assert that an inhabitant of
Birmingham or Manchester has a natural right, after having obtained the
consent of the Crown, to restrain, and prevent an industrious settler of the
colonies from engaging in those particular manufactures which may
interfere with the business of his own profession. Absurd as this assertion
is, either this must be maintained, or one full as pregnant with absurdity;
since one may with as much reason suppose this natural superiority in the
freemen of Great-Britain, as this acquired sovereignty in the collective
body of their representatives. Whatever reasons they may devise to support
this extraordinary claim, the motives to their usurpation are clearly evinced
in that part of Mr. Pitt’s speech, where he says—“If the legislative power of
Great-Britain over America ceases to be sovereign and supreme, I would
advise every gentleman to sell his lands and embark for that country.” A
jealous fear, that, from the many natural advantages which we possess, we
may, in some future age, rival our envious brethren in strength and riches,
has urged them to exercise a piece of Ottoman policy, by strangling us in
our infancy. When we examine into the nature of those fears which have
already proved so fatal to our interest, the slightest examination shews them

as contemptible and ill-grounded as were ever entertained by the most
selfish of mankind.
Had not this refined policy of our British Machiavel interfered, and
roused us to attention, we should, in all human probability, have continued
for many centuries the faithful drudges of our indulgent mother; and GreatBritain would have increased in strength and riches in proportion to the
population of her colonies. While our commerce continued unrestrained we
should industriously have cultivated every branch of it, that we might be
enabled to pay punctually to Great-Britain, that ballance which would
every year increase; since our attention to the settling an immeasureable
extent of country would effectually prevent our establishing such
manufactories as would furnish us with the necessaries of life.
Had I sufficient information to enter into a minute detail of facts, I
believe it would be no difficult matter to prove, that, in the course of our
most successful commerce, Great-Britain receives nine-tenths of the profit;
whilst we are humbly contented with being well fed and cloathed as the
wages of our labour.
If this inferiority be the consequence of a reasonable connection, why
would they wish to reduce us to a state of abject dependence? Or, if with the
advantages which they already possess, a fair unlimited trade would bring
into their hands all the specie which we could draw from the West-Indies,
why would they wantonly use such detestable measures as they have lately
pursued, to effect the same purpose?
If the present severe system of politics be the result of unreasonable
jealousy, I will venture to assert that this very policy will counteract its own
intention. Their distresses first led the colonists into enquiries concerning
the nature of their political situation, and the justice of the treatment which
they had received. That ignorance which had kept them in a state of

peaceable submission fled before their eager researches after that
information which was so essentially necessary to the preservation of their
liberty. Enraged to find, that, while they had been amused with the specious
title of fellow subjects, and flattered with the rights of British freemen, they
were in reality treated as infants in policy, whose every motion was to be
directed by the arbitrary will of their jealous parent; when every such
direction evidently tended to reduce the one to an abject state of
dependence, and to raise the other to the most exalted superiority. That both
these purposes could easily have been obtained, by measures artfully
managed, is not to be doubted, since nothing but the most violent
oppression could have roused us from our state of stupefaction to a proper
degree of attention. But when our sensibility was excited by the most
pointed injustice, rage instantly succeeded that tranquility which had been
nourished by our imaginary security. Warmed with a sense of the injuries
which we suffered, neither our gratitude nor our fear could prevent our
asserting those rights, the possession of which can alone determine us
freemen; and, though we could not but see that superiority of power which
could “crush us to atoms” yet could we have found even in the modern
history of Europe so many examples for our encouragement, that we should
not have despaired of assistance sufficient to preserve us from the worst of
evils.
Quam vos facillime agitis, quam estis maxume potentes,
dites, fortunati, nobiles, tam maxume vos æquo animo
œqua noscere oportet, si vos voltis perhiberi probos.
Terent. Adelph.

NUMBER III.

THE advocates for the sovereignty of Great-Britain enumerate amongst the
other obligations by which we are bound, the favours which she has
constantly conferred, and the support which we have continually received.
If we could reasonably suppose a whole political body, actuated by the
same passions which may influence an individual, then, indeed there would
be some foundation for our grateful acknowledgements; but when we
plainly perceive that the bounties which Great-Britain is said so lavishly to
have bestowed upon us, are meted out in the common political measure,
with an evident intention finally to promote her own particular benefit, we
can only say that her actions are the result of good policy not of great
generosity. As for the support which they have given us in times of danger,
if it did not immediately arise from the same motive which has produced
their other favours, I am still amazed that it should be even mentioned by
those who have lavished so much blood and treasure, for the maintenance
of an imaginary ballance, or in defending those who never thanked them
for their defence.
The most superficial examination must serve to convince us that the
battles of Great-Britain could no where have been fought with so much
advantage as in the woods of America; where her troops could be supplied
with all the necessaries of life upon the easiest terms, and from whence all
the money which they expended immediately returned in immense
payments for the extraordinary importations of her manufactures which the
exigencies of the war required. Thus were the whole expences of the
American war very far from lessening the strength or riches of the nation;
while her forces, which were not sufficient to make any considerable
impression upon the body of her natural enemy, were enabled to lop off one
of its most valuable limbs. In effecting this glorious purpose, I will venture
to mention the assistance which they received from the provincial troops as

an aid of more importance than is generally allowed. I will even take the
liberty to assert, that the colonists, in proportion to their real ability, did
more for the general cause than could reasonably have been expected, if not
more than Great-Britain herself. This assertion I fancy will gain more credit
now than it would have gained some time ago; since the eyes of the world
are at last open, and they must, if they are not wilfully blind, plainly
discover, that the estimates of our wealth which have been received from
ignorant or prejudiced persons, are, in every calculation, grossly erroneous.
These misrepresentations, which have been so industriously propagated, are
very possibly the offspring of political invention, as they form the best
apology for imposing upon us burthens to which we are altogether unequal.
The easy faith which every absurd information obtained, and the precipitate
measures, which were the consequence of this unreasonable credulity, must
sufficiently convince us, that while we are within the reach of parliamentary
power, we shall not be suffered to riot in a superfluity of wealth, or to
acquire any dangerous degree of strength. Whatever advantages may
hereafter present themselves, from an increased population, or a more
extended trade, we shall never be able to cultivate them to any valuable
purpose; for, howmuch soever we may possess the ability of acquiring
wealth and independence, the partial views of our selfish brethren,
supported by the sovereignty of Parliament, will most effectually prevent
our enjoying such invaluable acquisitions.
If any alteration in our system of agriculture, should furnish us with a
sufficiency of the necessary articles for the establishment of the most
valuable manufactories, and an increase of population should enable us to
carry them on to the greatest advantage, the manufacturers of Great-Britain,
jealous of such a formidable encroachment, would easily obtain the
interposition of our sovereign directors; who would very naturally ordain,

that we should export our unwrought materials to be laboured by our more
skillful brethren, and dispatch our superfluous inhabitants in search of
another vacant world: And, if the extent of our commerce should draw into
our hands the wealth of all the Indies, the same unlimitted authority would
always carefully provide ways and means for conveying the whole into the
treasury of England. Perhaps some future G——lle, refining upon the
system of his predecessor, may make the powers of legislation answer the
purposes of oppression as effectually as the severest taxation.
The measures which have already been pursued almost give to
conjecture the force of conviction; since no man can have been so
inattentive to the most interesting facts as not to know that the power of
Parliament, exerted in the single instance of restraining our trade, has
already reduced us to inconceivable distress. Denied the means of acquiring
specie sufficient for the purposes of a general circulation, and limitted in the
emission of our paper currency, men of considerable real estates become
unable to answer the most trifling demands; and, when urged by creditors,
perhaps as much perplexed as themselves, their lands are sold by execution
for less than half their former value. This, as one of the most striking
inconveniences, attending the late unseasonable exertion of parliamentary
power, I have selected for observation, from a very extensive catalogue of
grievances which it has already produced, and of which we are at this
moment most severely sensible. I am led to my choice of this particular fact
from a consideration of the fatal consequence by which it may possibly be
attended, should the merchants of England immediately demand a rigid
payment of the general ballance due to them. It is not an easy matter to
conceive how much our property may be affected by so unseasonable a
demand; since the calamity would, by a regular connection, extend from the
lowest to the highest member of society. But, as it was never my intention

to enter into a minute detail of facts, I shall content myself with offering
such loose, desultory observations as may serve to direct others in their
researches after more particular information upon the most interesting
subject. In the further pursuit of this design, I shall just take the liberty to
observe upon the resolves of the Commons, of February 1766; that the
severe censures which they so liberally bestow upon us, are evidently
inconsistent with the principles upon which they are supposed to have voted
the repeal of the Stamp-act.
From these resolves we may very reasonably suppose that the repeal is
more immediately founded upon the inexpediency of the act, than upon a
conviction that they had exerted an unconstitutional power. Had they been
willing to allow this act as invasive of an indisputable right, they would not
so severely have censured us for our daring opposition, and lavished such
praises upon those whose selfish views or slavish principles made them so
readily subscribe to the infalibility and omnipotence of Parliament.—A
peaceable submission to the first attacks of encroaching power, is altogether
incompatible with the genius of liberty; nor could it reasonably be expected,
that, in such a sudden and dangerous invasion of our most estimable rights,
the form of opposition could be perfectly model’d by the hand of prudence.
Violent and precipitate as our measures were, they wanted nothing but
success to sanctify them; since the most superficial observer cannot but
have discovered, that, in the political world right and wrong are merely
arbitrary modes totally dependent upon the rise and fall of contending
parties.
The people of England very justly dissatisfied with the tyrannic
conduct of a weak prince, made the boldest struggles for the support of their
languishing liberty. In their first ill-directed efforts under the unfortunate
Monmouth, the justice of their cause could not save them from the pains

and penalties of open rebellion: But when a Prince of military abilities gave
them his powerful assistance, they suddenly effected the preservation of
their freedom and distinguished so important an event by the title of a
glorious revolution; so much influence has success in rating the merit of our
political conduct.
When the Committee of the House resolve, in the most general and
expressive terms, that the authority of Parliament over the colonies is
sovereign and supreme in every respect whatever, there is no reasoning
against so formidable a resolution, supported by the power of the whole
Kingdom. We can only remark that the same house has heretofore resolved
to take under their own particular direction, the rights of the People, the
privileges of the Lords, and the sovereignty of the Crown; and, for a long
time maintained this unnatural usurpation.
If they did not suffer the passions of the man to influence the
judgement of the Senator, they would never treat that as a point of honour
which should only be considered as a matter of right.
If, upon a cool, dispassionate enquiry, it may appear that the Commons
of Great-Britain, have no natural or acquired superiority over the freemen
of America, they will certainly do us the justice to acknowledge this very
reasonable independence, and not wickedly endeavour to enslave millions
to promote the honour and dignity of a few ambitious individuals.
In supporting this doctrine of independence, I have established as an
incontrovertible truth, this very accurate definition of my Lord C. J. Hale—
That every act of Parliament is a tripartite indenture of agreement between
the three estates of the Kingdom. If this maxim be not disputable, I very
humbly conceive that every consequence which I have drawn from it, is
fairly and logically deduced; for it cannot, but with the most glaring

absurdity, be supposed, that the parties to these political agreements may
legally bind those who are not, in any wise privy to them.
The very spirit of the English constitution requires, that general
regulations framed for the government of society, must have the sanction of
general approbation; and, that no man shall be deprived of life, liberty or
property, but, by the force of those laws to which he has voluntarily
subscribed. These principles once acknowledged as the foundation of
English liberty, how can the colonists be said to possess the natural rights
of mankind, or the peculiar privileges of Englishmen, while they are every
day liable to receive laws framed by persons ignorant of their abilities—
unacquainted with their necessities, and evidently influenced by partial
motives? If my zeal for the good of my country has not greatly clouded my
judgment, I still dare so far depend upon the principles which I have
established, as to assert, that, while the power of the British Parliament is
acknowledged Sovereign & supreme in every respect whatever, the liberty
of America is no more than a flattering dream, and her privileges delusive
shadows.
While I relate matters of fact, from the best evidence which I am
capable of receiving, if I have misrepresented them, I lie open to
contradiction; and, when I recapitulate the principles from which I have
drawn my train of reasoning, I am not so obstinately attached to my own
opinion as to be proof against conviction. If I am guilty of any errors in the
course of this unconnected performance, they must be attributed to my not
having received sufficient information, or to my want of ability in using the
materials which I had acquired. I have never wilfully misrepresented a fact,
nor designedly drawn from it a falacious consequence. I have not laboured
to establish any favourite system, and, with the vanity of a projector,
supported it at the expence of my veracity.

But however triffling this performance may appear, both my head and
my heart have co-operated in its production, and I really sat down—“to
write what I thought, not to think what I should write.”
Ardeo, mihi credite—incredibili quodam amore patriæ—
quod volent denique homines existiment; nemini ego
possum esse bene de republica merenti non amicus.
CICERO.
A CITIZEN.
FINIS.
3

“WHAT PROPERTY HAVE THEY IN THAT WHICH ANOTHER MAY, BY RIGHT, TAKE
WHEN HE PLEASES, TO HIMSELF.” LOCKE on Government.
4De

plus, le droit de proprietè n’etant que de convention, et d’institution
humaine, tout homme peut, a son grè disposer de ce qu’il possede: Mais il
n’en est pas de meme des dons essentiels de la nature, tels que la vie et la
libertè, dont il est permis a chacun de jouir, et dont il est au moins douteux
qu’on ait droit de se depouiller. ROUSSEAU.
Mais quand on pounoit aliener sa libertè comme ses biens, la difference
seroit tres grande pour les enfans, qui ne jouissent des biens du pere que
par transmission de son droit, au lieu que la libertè etant un don qu’ils
tiennent de la nature en qualitè d’Hommes, leurs parens n’ont eu aucun
droit de les en depouiller. ibid.
5A

subordination not only incompatible with the principles of the English
constitution, but even not to be reconciled to the law of nature if we admit
as just the following definition.
“On commence par rechercher les regles, don’t, pour L’Utilitè commune
il seroit a propos que les hommes convinssent entre eux; & puis on donne le

nom de loi naturelle ala collection de ces regles sans autre preuve que le
bien qu’on trouve qui resulteroit de leur pratique universelle.” ROUSSEAU.
6Qui

statuit aliquid, parte inaudita altera æquum licet statuerit, haud
æquus fuerit. SENEC. Med.
7Le

contract de government est tellement dissous par le despotisme que le
despote n’est le maitre qu’aussi long tems qu’il est le plus fort; et que sitot
qu’on peut l’expulser il n’a point a reclamer contre la violence. ROSSEAU.

NO. 4. THURSDAY, March 10, 1768.
By
Suo quemque judicio homines odisse aut diligere, et res probare
aut improbare debere, non pendere, ex alterius vultu ac nutu, nec
alieni momentis animi circumagi.
LIVY.

N

can be more unjustifiable, or indeed more contemptible, than
for a man to declare opinions of private characters, or censures of
public measures, which are not the result of his own deliberate judgement;
but formed under the influence of friendly prejudice. The council of a friend
may lead and direct me in my researches after truth; but no man ought to
place such boundless confidence in the judgement of another, as to deprive
himself of those advantages which he might receive from the exercise of his
own reason. Those sentiments which I have taken up on the credit of my
friend, may be considered as a body of mercenary troops, with whose
strength I am not sufficiently acquainted, and upon whose firmness I can
never safely depend; while those opinions which are the laboured
production of my own brain, may be regarded as a kind of national militia,
known by repeated experience, and trusted with implicit confidence. The
partiality which we too frequently shew to the offspring of our own political
invention, may sometimes indeed expose us to deserved ridicule; but will
not our bigotted attachment to the judgment of those who have gained our
confidence, lead us into absurdities as great, and errors much more fatal?
Those gentlemen who have generously devoted their pens to the service of
OTHING

their country, and have given such repeated proofs of their extensive
abilities, as well as of their sincere attachment to the cause of liberty, are
justly entitled to our gratitude and applause; but our regard for the man
should never lead us to adopt the maxims of the politician, without the most
cautious enquiries into their truth and utility.
When Science had reached her meridian height in Greece, the
Athenians, who were the most polite and learned of the Greeks, carried this
dangerous inattention so far, that they resigned the consideration of all
public matters to those few who possessed the art of ingratiating
themselves, by tickling their ears with the most elegant orations.—
Eloquence then was a talent most cultivated; and measures of the highest
importance were less influenced by the unpolished sense of the judicious
patriot, than by the fascinating language of the venal orator. Faction,
discontent, and at length the total ruin of the common wealth, were the
consequences of this unpardonable indolence, and upon the strength of this
instance alone, I may venture to assert, that no people can ever continue
long in the exercise and enjoyment of liberty, unless they maintain
resolution enough to think for themselves.
America has never yet seen, and perhaps never will see, any time when
this doctrine could be inculcated with greater propriety. The advocates for
parliamentary power would stretch it out to a most unlimited extent, while
the friends of the colonies have confined their defence to that particular part
which was first invaded, and from the loss of which the most fatal effects
would immediately ensue. The right of taxation, as it had involv’d in itself
every other disposing authority, was at first controverted with the greatest
warmth; but the success of our opposition produced no more than a
temporary remission of an ill tim’d oppressive burthen; guarded with such
salvo jure, as plainly evinced the principles upon which this concession was

made. This formidable reservation produced such a spirit of diffidence and
timidity, that so far from extending their demands to all the rights of a free
people, the modest requisitions of our firmest patriots seem to have reached
no further than to the preservation of those privileges most immediately
necessary to our welfare. They are fearful of urging all their pretensions to
liberty, lest the hand of power should impose some more rigid restraint.
They are even industrious in framing reasons to support that branch of
parliamentary power, which they very reasonably believe too firmly
establish’d to be shaken by any opposition. This is the conduct of an artful
politician, not of a steady patriot. To wave one legal demand for the better
securing another, may, in the common occurrences of private life, be a
justifiable piece of policy; but, in matters of national concern, where the
happiness of a whole community is at stake, compositions of this kind are
of the most dangerous nature; and, tho’ a superiority of power may justify a
peaceable submission, yet nothing can excuse the base relinquishing of our
claim to all the rights of free men. Let power be lodg’d in the hands of one,
or one hundred, it ever was, and ever will be, of an encroaching nature; and,
if a selfish motive of temporary expediency, should draw from the present
inhabitants of the colonies any unguarded concessions, they will serve to
rivet the chains of slavery upon their wretched posterity.
Sciat regium Majestatem difficilius a summo Fastigio ad
medium detrahi, quam a mediis ad Ima præcipitari. LIVY.
If we exert ourselves in a timely opposition to the first advances of an
encroaching power, we may reasonably flatter ourselves with a hope of
succeeding; but if we supinely wait ’till this usurped authority is confirmed
by time, and strengthned by the common arts of usurpation we shall vainly
endeavour to check its irresistible progress. Common sense, and common

experience, most incontestably prove, that too much caution can not be used
in determining the nature and extent of all delegated power. The principles
upon which such delegation is established, should be carefully guarded
against, every doubtful or equivocal construction, and framed upon a plan
so clear and simple, as to be easily comprehended by the meanest capacity.
This is the peculiar merit and happiness of the English constitution; and to
this Great-Britain owes both her present grandeur and her former glory.
Enlightened by her example, and flattered with a hope of successfully
following her footsteps, shall we not prudently use the same measures to
produce the same effect.
The form of the British government, and the nature of our connection
with it, are so essentially different from every colonization with which we
are acquainted, that we cannot be directed by precedents drawn from any
former establishment. Our situation is indeed of the first impression, and
our conduct must therefore necessarily be regulated by general
constitutional principles. These principles must lead us through the
labyrinth of our present dispute; and by them we shall be enabled to support
the most extensive of our demands. Without any great assistance, from the
arts of reasoning, we shall very easily discover that those political
distinctions which have even amongst ourselves too generally prevail’d, are
absolutely inconsistent with the spirit of the English government. To deny
that the parliament of Great-Britain have any right to dispose of our
acquired property, and at the same time to assert their power to restrain our
natural liberty, is really advancing such a paradox in policy, as I shall never
attempt to reconcile.
If the preservation of our liberty is to us a matter of as much
importance as the security of our property, from whence can this absurd
distinction have arisen? We are told that the power which the parliament of

Great-Britain have usurped, to limit our trade and restrain our
manufactures, is founded in the very nature of the relation between an
infant colony and its parent stock; but no one has ever favoured us with
such a definition of this same parental authority, as might serve to maintain
their doctrine of dependence. The advocates for parliamentary power have
indeed repeatedly urged this relative superiority, to silence the clamours of
the discontented colonists; but no one has at any time endeavoured to
support these specious pretensions by the force of reasoning, or ever
attempted to prove, that a British colonist and a Spartan helot, were to be
considered in the same light. I will flatter myself that my countrymen are
already too well acquainted with the nature and extent of their constitutional
rights, to require any more arguments to evince the fatal tendency of that
subordination to which our enemies still labour to reduce us. I only wish to
convince them, that a concession which most of our own writers appear too
ready to make, may be attended with the most dangerous and fatal
consequences; and that it cannot, with any appearance of reason, be exacted
from us. We have heretofore, with the greatest warmth and unanimity,
denied to the parliament of Great-Britain the power of raising money upon
us by any internal tax, and we boldly remonstrated against the stamp-act, as
an act of violence and oppression. How inconsistent then must our conduct
appear, if we willingly subscribe to that authority which “can limit our
trade, restrain our manufactures, and bind us in every respect, but that of
taking money out of our pockets without our consent;” since it cannot but be
perceived, that this restraining power will have as pernicious an effect, both
upon our liberty and our property, as any other with which our enemies
could wish to curb us. It has repeatedly been alledged, that this restraining
authority is essential to the welfare of Great-Britain—that it has grown up
with the colonies from their infancy, and is become a necessary ingredient

in their constitution. It is readily allowed that such a regulating power ought
to be lodged somewhere, for the benefit of the whole community; but when
we pay this attention due to the interest of the mother country, let us not be
shamefully negligent of our own preservation, by conceding such an
extensive, unlimitted authority as may at any time be exercised to our own
ruin. Under a pretence of regulating our trade we may be stripped of our
property; and with an appearance of limitting our manufactures, we may
insensibly be robbed of our liberty. To depend for the security of all that is
valuable in life, upon that opposition which all mankind have a right to
make against acts of violence and oppression, would be expecting relief
from a remedy which is too often worse than the disease itself. There
cannot indeed be a juster principle in all free governments, than that those
who have received any delegated power, are accountable to their
constituents for any abuse of their trust: But no man of common sense, can
ever consider this dangerous resource as a sufficient security against all
those mischiefs which so frequently attend the lodging an unlimitted
authority in the hands of any individual.
This reservation, which is so reasonably implied in every social
compact, should indeed never be totally forgotten; but to rely on that alone
for safety, and in consequence of this ill-plac’d confidence, to relax from
that rigid caution, which distinguish’d the conduct of our prudent ancestors,
would most deservedly draw upon us a charge of folly and presumption.
Such is the weakness and depravity of human nature, that in every political
contract, the welfare of the people should depend as little as possible upon
the will and discretion of the magistrate. “Est sapientis judicis cogitare
tantum sibi a populo esse permissum, quantum commissum et creditum sit,
et non solum sibi potestatem datam verum etiam Fidem habitam esse
miminisse. Cic. pro Cluent.” In every commission of power, where the

utmost force of reason, and every art of political caution have been exerted
to guard the interest and happiness of the governed, so imperfect is the state
of human knowledge, that something will still depend upon the will of the
magistrate. It is therefore essential to the constitution of every free
government, that the magistracy should not only be considered as acting by
virtue of the power which is expressly committed to them, but as bound by
the confidence necessarily reposed in them, to exercise that power for the
general benefit of those from whom they received it. A breach of faith
immediately dissolves the political contract, and those who are injur’d, have
an indisputable right to use any measures for redress of their grievances; but
those, whose judgements are most corrected by an intimate acquaintance
with antient and modern history, can very easily discover how little
dependence is to be placed on so violent and precarious a remedy.—It is,
and ought ever to be preserv’d as a check upon the ambition of our rulers;
but let it ever be remember’d, that the safety and happiness of every nation
will depend less upon the excellence of their original constitution, than
upon their continued care to preserve its principles inviolate. Our political
determinations should be govern’d by the same reasoning which constantly
influences the prudent dispensation of our establish’d laws, where but very
little attention is paid to arguments drawn from a temporary expediency. Let
us now endeavour to apply what has already been offered, to the purpose
for which it was designed, and let us reduce the state of what we at present
contend for, to the simplest position. Can we, with any appearance of
consistency, boldly deny to the parliament of Great-Britain, a right to
dispose of our acquired property, and yet tamely concede a power of
restraining our natural liberty? Can we explain this paradox to the
apprehension of common sense? Or can we reconcile this conduct to the
duty which we owe to ourselves and our posterity? Is wealth of more

importance to us than freedom, or can we expect to enjoy the one when we
have lost the other? Should we not, with great reason, laugh at the folly of
that man, who might think to guard his domestic treasure against the
invasions of the nightly robber, by carefully shutting up his windows, while
his unshut doors offered him an easy passage? And would not this absurdity
assume the face of madness, if, in pursuit of his extravagance, he should
leave unguarded every passage to his wealth and person, depending
altogether for their security upon that opposition which he might justly
make to any such illegal attack? Exposed to artifice which he might never
detect, or invaded by a power which he might be unable to resist, we should
very reasonably expect that he would fall a sacrifice to his own extravagant
presumption.
It has been urged that this power of regulating and restraining our
trade, has grown up with the colonies, and is become a part of their
constitution. This argument can prove nothing, because it proves too much;
since the same mode of reasoning will sanctify all those encroachments
upon our liberty which have from time to time been made by the lawless
power of a wicked minister, or by the envious partiality of a jealous
Parliament. Incapable of framing laws for our own government, we
willingly received them from the hands of others; and too weak to contend,
we patiently submitted to a power which we could not resist: But this
conduct, which was the result of an over ruling necessity, can never, with
any degree of propriety, be urged against our present endeavours to resume
and secure the rights and privileges of British subjects. When we come to
take a review of that variant, inconsistent form of government which we
have receiv’d at different periods of time, from the hands of arbitrary
ministers, we cannot but discover numberless deficiencies;—not barely
defects in form, but such imperfections as must inevitably destroy the very

basis of liberty. Alarm’d with this discovery, do we not very reasonably
require that the constitution of the colonies should be regulated by that most
excellent model which has been approved by the greatest politicians, and
admir’d by all the world. The King of Great-Britain, is King of America,
and he may boast of as loyal subjects in his colonies as any in his domestic
dominions. Why then are we denied that protection to which every subject
is entitled? Or why are the liberties of our more fortunate brethren to be
guarded by every precaution which their own prudence could suggest, while
the rights of the neglected Americans, are not only expos’d to the
encroachments of the royal power, but absolutely lie at the mercy of their
fellow subjects?
In every government, not regulated by particular charters, we have a
council vested with all the legislative and judicial powers of the British
Peers; and yet this so important and formidable a body is instantly rais’d by
the warmth of ministerial sunshine, and ceases to exist the moment that is
withdrawn.—our judges too hold their commissions durante bene Placito,
and, by the last act of ministerial policy, they are to be rendered more
compleatly independent of the people, and more subject to the influence of
a royal instruction. The Parliament have devised a method of raising money
for the support of government, and that minister who may have the
management of American affairs, may arbitrarily dispose of this supply in
such pensions and salaries as may most effectually advance his own
interest, and reward his numerous dependents. With a constitution so
imperfect, and unequal to the support of liberty, how can we weakly
imagine that our legislature shall provide for our safety by necessary and
equitable laws; or that our judges will secure our property by honest
impartial judgements?

Those who are best acquainted with the delicate machinery of the
English government, and who plainly perceive how precarious and
fluctuating its balance is, have ever cautiously exerted themselves to guard
against the most distant appearance of danger. They have gone so far as to
consider the power of creating any additional number of peers, as a
dangerous prerogative; and, in the bill of rights it is expressly declared, as
essential to the preservation of liberty, “that every judge shall hold his
commission quamdiu se bene gesserit.” Thus will the history of our mother
country, and an examination of its happy constitution, sufficiently explain to
us the dangerous nature of our present situation, and evidently prove that
we cannot be too early or too urgent in petitioning for the establishment of
such a well digested system of government, as may secure to us and our
posterity all those rights and privileges which our forefathers heretofore
happily enjoyed.
“Hæc primo paulatim crescere, interdum vindicari; Post,
ubi Contagio, quasi Pestilentia invasit, Civitas immutata,
Imperium ex justissimo atque optimo, crudele intolerandum
factum.”

Salust. Bell. Catil.
A CITIZEN

