PAMPHLET 1
“Cato,” Thoughts on a Question of Importance Proposed to the
Public, Whether It Is Probable That the Immense Extent of
Territory Acquired by This Nation at the Late Peace, Will
Operate towards the Prosperity, or the Ruin of the Island of
Great-Britain? London, 1765.
The acquisition of millions of acres of territory as a result of the Peace of Paris in 1763 did not please
all Englishmen. Knowing they could not keep everything they had conquered, some Britons wanted
to retain the rich sugar-producing French islands of Martinique and Guadeloupe and return to France
the barren wastes of Canada. Following debates in the English press, in which Benjamin Franklin
participated, the jealousy of the British sugar-producing islands and the prospect of new markets in
North America for English manufactured goods convinced the government to keep Canada and
return the two sugar islands to France. It was a fateful decision. Better to have given up Canada and
faced again the combined frontier menace of the French and Indians, Thomas Hutchinson, the last
civilian royal governor of Massachusetts, would remark in 1773. If Canada had remained in the
hands of France, declared Hutchinson with the benefit of a decade of hindsight, “none of the spirit of
opposition to the Mother Country would have yet appeared.”
“Cato,” the anonymous English author of this pamphlet, wrote with a sense of deep foreboding
about Britain’s immense acquisitions of what he took to be the virtually empty land of the New
World. Not only anxious about the potential challenge posed by the development of trade and
manufacturing in the colonies, he expressed a concern, shared by many other Britons in the 1760s
and early 1770s, about the large numbers of British subjects migrating to the colonies. In some cases
whole neighborhoods seemed to be pulling up stakes and sailing to America, leaving behind the
depopulated countryside famously described by Oliver Goldsmith in his 1770 poem “The Deserted
Village.” Indeed, some British officials even contemplated a parliamentary ban on the exodus of
people to America. Dr. Samuel Johnson especially came to lament the scale of such emigration,
which, he warned, would not only diminish the society of Britain but would leave the migrating
settlers scattered throughout the wilds of America bereft of all civilization. Although Cato’s pamphlet
suggested that the flight of Britons to the New World might act as a goad to reforming British society,

it also revealed that even before the American crisis erupted there existed in London a feeling that the
vast extent of the colonies in the New World might turn out to be more of a curse than a blessing to
the mother country.

TO ——— ——— ESQ; MEMBER OF
PARLIAMENT FOR THE COUNTY OF ————.
SIR,

A

FTER

the repeated Victories gained over the Minority, it is supposed

that the two Houses of Parliament, and particularly that of the
Commons, which hath nothing to do as a Court of Judicature, will employ
themselves in concerting Measures for promoting the Good of the Nation.
You ought to lose no Time in falling about this Work; for a quiet Interval,
such as you now enjoy, is very rare in Countries where there is so much
Liberty as we have at present; neither can it be expected to last long. This is
the best Excuse that can be made for Ministers of State doing so little for
the Public Benefit among us. The Duration of their Power is so uncertain,
and its Extent so limited, even while they possess it, that few Designs of
general Utility can be either projected or carried into Execution while it
continues.
Your present Opportunity therefore is the more precious, and I hope
will not be altogether lost. It is very probable, however, that with the best
Intentions in the World, you may be misled. Proposals for new Laws will
probably be made and supported chiefly by those who have particular
Interest in them; and this may be done with so much Plausibility as to
deceive Persons of the best understanding. With great Humility, therefore, I
submit the Thoughts in the following Tract to Your Consideration, and that
of the Publick. They arise from Attachment to no Party, and, so far as I can
perceive, to no particular Interest. They have been generated by Reading
and Reflexion on the History of other Nations, and a good deal of Attention
paid to the Causes of Prosperity or Decay in several Cities and Counties of

this Kingdom. I have generally found, that Bodies of Men, as well as
private Persons, were incessantly pursuing after Things which proved
prejudicial to them, after they had attained them. And in many Cases it was
easy to see, after some Years Experience, that the Prosperity of Societies
had been owing, in a great Measure, to a Circumstance or two, which all the
while they were groaning under, and crying out against as an intolerable
Grievance.
Filled with Reflections of this Kind, I leave you to judge what were
my Sentiments of the violent Clamours against the late Peace. I began to
think what Dominions the King of Great Britain now had, and what use he
had for any more; and was soon led into a strong Suspicion, that, instead of
having too little Land, he had by far too much. Whether in prosecuting
those Reflections I have carried the Matter too great a Length, I shall not
say, as we are all ready to run into Extremes. But one Thing is certain; that
the Basis of all Deliberation on our Connection with the Colonies abroad,
ought to be Not—how will they bring the greatest immediate Wealth into
the Coffers of a few Merchants? Or how will they bring the greatest
immediate Splendor to the City of London?—But how will they continue to
promote the Population of the Island, and the Industry of the People of
Great Britain?
I sincerely wish you a good Session of Parliament, and am,
SIR,
Your most obedient
Humble Servant,
CATO.

Thoughts on a Question, &c.
Whether is it probable that the Immense Extent of Territory acquired
by this Nation at the late Peace, will operate towards the
Prosperity, or the Ruin of the Island of Great-Britain?

I

proposed this Question to the Public, because, after thinking upon
it a good deal in the most cool and dispassionate Manner, my own
Opinion is still, in a great Measure, undetermined. Let no Man imagine it is
a Political or Party Question. I believe the Ministers of State, in negotiating
the late Peace, acted as wisely and sincerely as any who have been before
them employed in the like Work; subject however at the same time to the
Errors and Prejudices which are inseparable from Humanity. I would not at
this Moment give three Farthings, for my own particular Part, to determine
which of the Parties, Majority or Minority should prevail. Neither do I think
it is of any Importance to the Public, except in so far as every good Subject
would wish, that His Majesty should partake a little of the Peace and Quiet
which we so happily enjoy under his Government.
Having proposed the Question, no more should have been said upon it
by me, were it not for the following Circumstance. Some perhaps who have
given Credit to my Declaration, that it is not Politically intended, may still
be so clear upon one Side, as to despise and count it Ridiculous. I shall
therefore throw out a few general Reflections which have led me to look
upon it, as, at least, Problematical; and I am sure if it be doubtful, no Man
can deny that it is Important.
The Territory acquired is so immense, that it must make the Time of
Acquisition a remarkable Æra of this Government, and produce a great
HAVE

Change in our Situation and Circumstances as a Society. As the smallest
Member of a Natural Body affects the whole in some Degree; so every one
Circumstance with regard to a Political Body, has some Influence upon
every other. A Nation must accommodate itself some way or other, well or
ill, to the whole Extent of its Territory. The most distant and desolate Part of
the Dominions of any People, has some Relation to them, either as a Benefit
or Burthen; otherwise it is not their’s. Hence it follows, that any Acquisition
would have produced some Change; and therefore so great an Acquisition,
and that made all at once, must produce a very great one.
Men have often conjectured wrong, perhaps they have seldom
conjectured right, as to the Effects of great Changes in a State or
Government, till they felt them by Experience. The Spanish Monarchy, at
the Time when it got Possession of the West Indies, was one of the most
powerful, if not the most powerful and flourishing in Europe. Would not
any Man at that Time have been reckoned disordered in his Judgment, who
should have affirmed, that the Kingdom would be the worse for that
Addition; and particularly that it would become poor by Means of the Gold
and Silver Mines? Yet do we not know that it proved so in Fact; and that
there is not now any Man of the least Political Reflection, but can explain
for what Reasons it was, and behoved to be so? That solemn People
believed that they should possess all Things without working, because they
had plenty of Gold, which they had always hitherto seen sufficient to
Purchase all Things. They only forgot, that as they could neither eat nor
wear Gold, they must necessarily pay to such as would work for them, just
in Proportion to the Abundance of Gold they possessed. Thus their Stock
was soon exhausted, and would have been so, perhaps sooner, if it had been
a thousand times greater than it was. When either a Person or People are

ruined by too much of any thing that is good in a moderate Degree, the
greater the Quantity, their Ruin comes on so much the more speedily.1
I know it will be said (and perhaps every Reader is before-hand with
me in thinking it) “We have not got more Money to make us idle, but more
Land, which we may have an Opportunity to improve.” But I must beg
leave to ask, Is any Man sure that it is not possible to get too much Land, as
well as too much Money? We have now from the Gulph of Florida to the
North-Pole, at least with very little Exception; how far West I really do not
know. What pity is it that we did not keep the whole Island of Cuba, and by
another Year’s War, take from the Spaniards all their Possessions in SouthAmerica? After we had done so, there would have remained still some more
of the Globe to conquer. Is not the Lust of Conquest in a Nation as
insatiable as the Lust of Gold in a Miser? And is it not much more hurtful?
If any thinks otherwise, if he either thinks we have not enough, or not more
than enough at present, let him explain clearly the Reasons of his Opinion,
and what will be the probable Effect of the Acquisition upon the Society.
There is the greater need of Accuracy in this Matter, that I believe the
Event, taking in all its Circumstances, is quite singular, the like never
having happened before. Some Nations formerly have in the Course of a
few Years, conquered great Tracts of Country; but they ordinarily obtained
new Subjects as well as new Ground: Whereas our late Acquisition may be
justly called mere Earth. Nay, though we had all that the Indians possess
behind, as which we shall very soon have, it will be the same Thing; for
they seem upon the Eve of either dwindling into nothing of themselves, or
being exterminated by us.2
Has it not been long ago agreed upon by Persons of Reason and
Observation, that it is not the Extent of a Country, but the Number of
Inhabitants in proportion to its Extent, that constitutes the Strength of a

Nation? If I am not mistaken, it used to be affirmed in some such
Proportion as this, that supposing ten Millions of People to inhabit one
Country, and the same Number to inhabit another of double the Extent, the
first State would be four times as powerful as the last. Is this Maxim now
found to be false? Or, on what Account is it not applicable to our Case? If
we take Great-Britain and its Colonies as one Body, I do not see what
should hinder it to be applied. If we take them as separate Bodies in
Alliance, from which Alliance we in this Nation hitherto derived great
Advantages, I acknowledge it in Part. But my Question still remains; will
these endless Tracts of Ground, in future Times, fill this Kingdom with
Inhabitants, or depopulate it?
First, let us suppose Great-Britain and its Colonies as one Society.
I am very sensible that a Situation can be supposed, and that many
Nations have been in such a Situation, as that occupying waste Grounds has
tended to increase both their Number and Strength. It increases their
Number without Question, because when the Means of Subsistence are
made easy, the common People are encouraged to marry. But before it can
increase their Strength, I apprehend two Conditions are essentially requisite.
1st. That the Land they have already be fully stocked, and likely to continue
so. If this is not the Case, the Migration is unnecessary at least, if not
hurtful. 2d. There is another Condition, not so commonly thought of,
necessary to a People’s increasing in Strength by settling more Land. What
I mean is, that there be a plain and simple Taste of Life, so that Agriculture
may support them comfortably. This was the Case with the Romans in the
early Times of their Republick, as well as many other antient Nations. Now
it must be considered, that they had very little either of Commerce or
Manufactures; so that they soon became not only full, but overstocked; and
having nothing but the Fruits of their own Ground to support them, they

were obliged to send Colonies abroad. These Colonies went not to seek
Wealth, but Food. So simple was their Taste of Life, that in the beginning of
the Roman State, a Family was decently maintained upon one Acre and a
Quarter of an Acre English. When Appius Clausus left the Sabines, he
brought with him to Rome five thousand Sabine Families, to each of whom
the above Quantity was assigned, and that Great Man had the immense
Estate of fifteen Acres given to himself. How different from the late Grants
of American Lands?
Let us carefully remember therefore, that it must be Manufacture and
Commerce only, which can make a People numerous and prosperous, after
Elegance and Luxury have been once introduced. Now it is at least very
doubtful, whether a narrow be not more favourable than an extended
Territory for their Advancement. There is less Necessity either of
Manufactures or Commerce in an extended Territory, because the Multitude
of common People, by whose Hands National Industry must be carried on,
can easily find Support without them: Whereas when they are confined to
their own Bounds, those who cannot be Husbandmen, are obliged to be
Artificers. I believe Experience will confirm this Observation, whether we
consider the State of Mankind in antient or modern Times.
But let us now suppose our Colonies separate Bodies in Alliance with
us. It will probably be thought that these Settlements growing in Numbers,
in the same Manner and from the same Causes, that all new planted
Colonies do, their Commerce, which is confined to us, must be of great
Benefit to this Island. And no doubt if they be serviceable at all, this is the
single Light in which they can be so to us. How far they have been so
hitherto, I do not enquire; but whether they will continue to be so, or not,
seems to me very uncertain, for several Reasons.

1. They seem to threaten us with an Evil, not only dangerous or
troublesome, but ruinous, viz. Depopulation. Settling small Colonies may
do such Services as to Counterballance an inconsiderable Loss of People;
but settling vast Tracts may exhaust the Mother Country, and prove
Destruction. Letting a little Blood may be not only harmless, but
serviceable to the Body; and yet excessive Bleeding will kill as certainly as
any Disease, to which it is liable. I shall not spend Time in enumerating the
various Ways in which our Colonies drain us of People. Men of Rank or
Wealth, who have obtained Grants of Lands, spare no pains to inveigle them
away in Crowds to settle their several Possessions, because without People
these Possessions are good for nothing. Multitudes go away of their own
accord, allured by the enchanting Prospect of Wealth; and either never
return at all, or return in a frail diseased State, unfit for Propagation. We
suffer no inconsiderable Loss in the many thousands of Seamen and
Soldiers, which must now be sent to all Parts of the known World, to annoy
our Enemies in Time of War, and to protect our Friends in Time of Peace. If
all the Men who died an untimely Death by Sickness, Famine or the Sword,
in the Havannah Expedition, had been employed in some useful Occupation
in Great Britain, they and their Posterity, would have been of greater
Benefit to this Nation, than any two Islands in the West-Indies.
The farther Investigation of this I leave to every Reader, that he may
compute the Numbers in his own Mind. Let me only observe, that in
Proportion as the Number of Hands is lessened, the Price of Labour, and the
first Cost of our exported Commodities must be increased; at the very same
Time the Quantity of these Commodities must decrease, and the Gain upon
them centering here, must be diminished by the two concurring Causes. If
therefore a Trade to our foreign Plantations be highly profitable, we ought
to be the more concerned, lest by driving the Matter too far, we leave next

to no-body at home to trade with them. Every thing may be Evidence. Many
a Gentleman has laid out so much Money in building an elegant Palace, that
he has left himself no Estate on which he might possess and enjoy it.
2. The Advantage is in Danger of being lost another Way. Our
Plantations are becoming so extensive, that it is probable they will speedily
set up Manufactures of their own, and be our Rivals instead of our
Customers. This Effect will be accelerated by the Circumstance formerly
mentioned. Our Commodities will not be sufficient in Quantity for them to
consume, and they will be too costly for them to purchase. That this must
be the Case in some future Period, from the natural Course of Things, many
Writers have confessed; but they have generally considered it as at a very
great Distance, and therefore unworthy of Attention. There are however at
this Time many Symptoms of its being much nearer than we apprehended.
The only Thing by which it is retarded, is, that as Land is cheap in
America, and Labour dear, it is a more immediate and sure Way for a
Family to get Bread by cultivating the Ground, than by fabricating Goods,
which may be brought on easy Terms from Great-Britain. But this will soon
be at an End, both from the Numbers of People settled in Places near the
Sea, and from the unsatiable Avarice of the Proprietors of Land, who
already begin rather to suffer their vast Possessions to lie waste, than part
with them but at a very great Profit. The Truth is, I have some Suspicion
that it has been at an End in several of our Colonies for some Time, and that
nothing stands in the Way but the Difficulties and Discouragements which
attend the first setting up of Manufactures in every Country. Whenever
Interest or Necessity therefore shall overcome these Difficulties, it is easy to
foresee what an amazing and rapid Progress will be made in every Branch
of Business, by an enterprizing and industrious People.

Is there not also a Confirmation of this from Experience. If any Credit
may be given to our News-papers, many Tradesmen have of late gone from
different Parts of the Kingdom to America. I think it was said no less than
one hundred, of one Profession, from one Place, and at one Time.3 It has
also been affirmed, that several different Branches of Manufacture are
already set up in New-England: And our Merchants at home (who, however
little they understand of the Interest of the Public, understand their own
immediate Interest well enough) are making dreadful outcries upon it. We
are told it will be half a Million Sterling loss yearly to Great-Britain; and I
can easily believe it will very soon be double that Sum. But what Remedy?
Mention has been made of applying to Parliament to hinder the Exportation
of Artificers. On which I must beg leave to ask, Will they go if it does not
appear to be their Interest? And if it be their Interest, will you hinder them?
Or if you would, how can you hinder them? I do not know whether the
Parliament will pay any regard to these childish Complaints, or not; but I
am sure that any Measures they could contrive for that purpose would be
quite ineffectual.
3. I must examine another Circumstance in our Situation with regard to
the Colonies; viz. Our exclusive Right to trade with them. It may be said, let
them be as extensive as you please; let them set up as many Manufactures
as they themselves please: Still their Trade will be valuable, and it is wholly
confined to this Island, they are not permitted to carry on Business with any
other Nation, but through the Medium of Great-Britain. But what signifies a
Trade, if it come to be a losing Trade? And that, from some of the above
Considerations, it may be sooner than we are aware of. Whenever they can
supply themselves, with Manufactures they will have no need of us; most of
the Luxuries and Delicacies of Life they can get nearer home from one
another, and are indeed a kind of World in themselves.

Besides, I strongly suspect this Circumstance of our having an
exclusive Right to trade with them, will operate slowly and silently indeed,
but constantly, and at last fatally, to our own Prejudice. There is much
selfishness in human Nature; and it will be, nay probably it has been, a
Temptation to us not to make our Manufactures as good and as cheap as
possible to procure voluntary Purchasers, because we think we can send
them to those who are obliged to take them. Let no Man think this a slight
Circumstance, or of no Moment. Baron Montesquieu has observed, in more
places than one of his Spirit of Laws, that the moral Causes of the Thriving
or Decay of a Nation, viz. such as arise from the Tempers or Principles of
the People, the Spirit of their Constitution, or their Situation with regard to
others, are unspeakably more powerful than occasional Causes, such as
War, Famine and Pestilence; or their Contraries. The Reason is plain—The
Effect of those which he calls Moral Causes, tho’ Impracticable, is
Universal and Perpetual. If therefore our exclusive Right to trade to our
own Plantations, tempts us to trust or lean too much to it, it may sink under
the Weight, and prove the Cause of our Destruction.
I think I have observed it asserted frequently by political Writers, when
railing against the Government, that the Ballance of Trade is against us to
every Nation, or almost every Nation in the World, except our own
Plantations. These Writers indeed are a sort of Witnesses, to whose
Testimony the least Credit is to be given of any People under the Sun; for
when it answers their Purpose, they will not stick to Assert not only the
grossest, but the most manifest Falshoods, as if they were quite superior to
any sense of Shame upon Detection. With Regard to this, in particular, I am
pretty certain the Ballance cannot be against us to Spain and Portugal,
because they have been already ruined in the very Way that I suspect our
Ruin to be approaching. But if the Ballance be against us with other

Nations, it is probable our Plantations themselves are the Cause of it, by
shewing us an easy Way of making a considerable Profit, so that now we
are not at so great Pains to Work as well and as cheap, and as much, as our
Neighbours about us.
This is naturally followed by another dangerous Consequence of our
exclusive Trade. Our Merchants will import from other Nations what they
can export to the British Plantations with Advantage. Such Commodities
passing through our Hands make a great Appearance of Commerce, and yet
add next to nothing to our Strength or Numbers; and not so much to our
Wealth as may perhaps be supposed. This shews how it is at least possible,
that our Possessions may have the same Effect upon us, that the Conquest
of Mexico and Peru had upon the Spaniards. We may slacken our own
Industry, and supply our Settlements by the Industry of others. Great Men
and great Merchants who have Estates and Property abroad, may make a
splendid Figure for a Time, while the Body of the Kingdom is gradually
losing its Nourishment, and falling into an incurable Consumption.
An exclusive Trade is of far less Consequence than may be imagined.
The Spirit of Commerce, says a late eminent Author, is of a very nice and
delicate Nature—I add, it is of a very subtile and penetrating Nature. The
Reason is the same for both. It is animated and conducted entirely by the
Interest of Individuals: So that unless this happens to co-incide with the
public good, one Part of the Nation must be indefatigable in bringing on the
Ruin of the Whole. Wherever Interest leads, or seems to lead, Trade will
force its Way over all Obstructions; neither can it be almost by any Means
forced to go another Way. We hear sometimes great Outcries against those
mercenary Wretches, who, for the sake of private Gain, will suck the very
Blood of the Poor, and riot in the Spoils of their Country.

Alas! you know little of Human Nature, if ever you expect to restrain
the Plurality by such Arguments; or if you could hinder them from doing Ill,
you will never make them do any Good. I remember not long ago, taking a
Walk through the Streets of London, I was led to reflect what an endless
Variety of Designs must be carried on uniformly to supply the Inhabitants
of that vast City, with every Necessary, and every imaginable Conveniency
of Life; and it immediately occurred, that nothing but mutual Interest could
do it. Without this, ten thousand Legislators constantly employed could not
devise the Means, and an hundred thousand Judges could not enforce the
Execution. The Spirit of all Laws on the Police of a City, or the Commerce
of a People, must be to make public and private Interest not only really, but
apparently and evidently the same.
Hence it follows, that an exclusive Trade preserved by Force against
the Inclination of the People concerned, cannot be carried very far, and
cannot continue very long. While we serve our Plantations as well as other
People, we may expect they will chearfully trade with us: So soon as we
either will not, or cannot do this, they will use every possible Means to be
supplied from another Quarter. The Spaniards have an exclusive Trade to
their own Settlements; and yet, if I am rightly informed, there are few
Branches from which we derive greater Profit, than an illicit Trade forced at
the Hazard both of Life and Fortune, from our West India Islands to the
Spanish Main. There have been lately some hideous Complaints against our
Commanders of King’s Ships for not encouraging this Trade. Would these
Complainers be pleased that the Parliament should open a free Trade to all
the World to our Plantations? They would certainly burn or pull down that
Member of Parliament’s House who should move for it. Now I desire to
know what an honest Man in Spain would think of the Equity of this
Procedure?

It appears indeed, from what I have said above, that I do not expect
much Equity from them, and therefore it is not upon that Side that I propose
to press the Argument. It is from the side of Interest. If we are so partial to
ourselves, as to trample upon every Law and every national Engagement,
when we hope to do it with Impunity or Profit, why should we expect others
to be more honest than ourselves, or that our Colonies will continue to trade
with us longer than it is their Interest to do so? For this Reason we should
bend all our Force to the Improvement of our own Country, by increasing
the Number, Sobriety and Industry of its Inhabitants. If there be any Defect
here, the most valuable Settlements will do us no good; and if there be a
visible Disproportion between our Colonies and our Ability to trade with
them, upon just and equal Terms, the more they are enlarged, the sooner
shall we be destroyed.
As I have all along professed the greatest Regard for the Parliament
and Ministry, it will be thought, perhaps, that we may, without much
Concern, leave the Care of the Public to them. Some Admirers of modern
Improvements are apt to speak in very high Terms of the Discernment of
this enlightened Age, as it is called. Such, it is not impossible, may be ready
to say, “Great National Mistakes have indeed formerly been committed, but
the Principles of Trade and Commerce, as well as Government, are now so
well understood that they will not be repeated. While Individuals are
pursuing their own Interest with unremitting Activity, the Legislature, ever
watchful for the general Good, and presiding over the whole, will observe
the first Appearance of any thing going against us, and take effectual
Measures for turning it into its proper Channel.” But though I see no
Reason for impeaching the Character of those who now compose the
Legislation or Administration, when compared with their Predecessors, yet
it is uncertain whether they will endeavour, and more so, whether they will

be able to prevent the injury we may suffer from unweildy Possessions. I
have not built my Arguments upon the Treachery of particular Men, or even
the Degeneracy of the present Age, but upon the Mistakes of Human
Nature, and the αχμη, as it were, of our Constitution, to which we have been
brought by the ordinary course of Things, and peculiar Disposition of
Providence.
Bodies of Men, alas! are far from being so clear-sighted, as they
themselves imagine. Immediate and seeming, or particular Interests, have
ordinarily so powerful an Effect on the most uncorrupted Part of them, as
bears down all other Considerations. How many Laws relating to Trade
have been framed with a sincere Intention to promote it, and yet have, in
Experience, proved hurtful to it; so that those who made them were obliged
to repeal them? Perhaps if all the Laws on the Subject were enumerated, it
might be shewn that the greater Part are prejudicial. All the exclusive
Rights of Corporations, and Monopolies of private Companies, if they were
necessary or useful at the Beginning, have long ceased to be so, and yet
many of them still continue. They must also probably continue for Ages yet
to come: such is the Spirit of the People. He would be a bad Minister; nay,
it would be a bold Parliament, that should attempt to lay them open. There
is nothing that appears to me more clear, than that the Restrictions we have
laid our Sister Kingdom of Ireland under, are prejudicial to ourselves; and
yet I would not be the Man who should propose to take them off in an
English House of Commons.
Have not most Laws been made to satisfy the interested Demands of
particular Persons, Classes and Counties? And have not the Clamour of the
Mob, in favour of their supposed, been generally against their own real
Interest? When the Woollen Trade was brought into this Country by People
from Flanders, did not the Natives immediately cry out, that they came to

eat the Bread out of their Mouths? Whereas it is now plain, they came to
put it into the Mouths of them and their Posterity. What monstrous Outcries
were made against the late Peace, because the Ministry gave back to the
French some of the Places we had taken from them? And yet have we not
much more behind than we know what to do with, or shall know for two
hundred Years, tho’, contrary to all Probability, we should be reaping
Benefit by them all the while. I will yield to no Subject of his Majesty in
Loyalty to my Prince, or Love to my Country; and yet I sincerely wish he
had given them back all that we took, and a good deal of our own besides;
provided we had brought all the People to Great Britain; and obliged our
Enemies to pay the real Expence of the War, that these new Subjects might
be put at first into a way of living. The French, had they attended to their
own Interest, had as little to do to fight with us in America, as we had to
fight with them in Germany; and if their Expulsion from so great a Part of it
shall make them so wise, as to cultivate their own excellent Country, to fill
their Land with People, and employ their People in Industry, future
Historians will be able to demonstrate that they were Gainers by being beat.
However fully I am satisfy’d of the Truth of these Remarks, I have
little hope that any Body of Men, even tho’ they should assent to them, will
have so much self government as to act steadily on the Principles to which
they lead. We all agree in Speculation that a King may have too much
Power, a Peerage too much Influence, a House of Commons too much
Weight, and a Multitude too much Liberty, so as to overturn the very
Constitution; and yet it is not to be expected that any one of them will
refuse an Accession to their own Share when it is offered, or surrender it
after they have obtained it.
But to keep close by the Subject of Commerce—How little Men in
general understand the Nature of it, may be seen from this Circumstance;

that many Nations have Laws still in force against the Exportation of Corn.
Is not this infinitely absurd? What signifies any such Law. If we import
more from any Nation than we send them, must we not pay the Ballance, or
give up the Trade? I am persuaded it is scarcely possible to make any Law
on the Subject of Trade, but what shall do more harm than good, excepting
those which are directly intended for preventing Fraud. These are absolutely
necessary and highly useful. Of the same Nature are all such Laws as tend
to make our own Commodities cheap and plentiful—But those which aim
only by Force or Prohibition to keep out the Commodities of other Nations,
have an inherent Weakness in them, and seldom or never answer the End
proposed.
There is an Assertion in some Part of the Writings of a well known
living Author (David Hume) that it is a Mistake for trading Nations to look
upon one another as Rivals, or as the opposite Weights in a Ballance; so that
the Exaltation of one implies of necessity the Depression of the other. He
says, he is persuaded of the contrary, and that the thriving of one Nation is a
Benefit, instead of an Injury, to all that are about them. The Sentiment is
undoubtedly noble and generous:—And I am persuaded that it is also
perfectly just and true. We may soon be satisfied of it, by going back to the
Original of all Traffick, and analysing it in the following plain and simple
Manner. If there was but one Man in the Earth, he would be obliged to dig
the Ground for his food, and dress it for his own Use; to patch together
something or another for his cloathing; to build himself some shelter from
the Weather;—that is to say—to be his own Gardiner, Cook, Taylor, Mason;
—and in short every Thing to himself. If there were one or two more joined
with him, they would find it convenient to distribute the common Labour,
and every Man to do as much of some particular Branches as to serve the
whole; and receive of the Labour of others for what he communicated of his

own. Its Society increases: the same general Plan is carried on—And one
City or Nation is to another in every Respect the same, as one Man to
another in a very small Number. Therefore the Radical Principle of all
Commerce is this: As much as one Person, Family, City or Nation provides
by its own proper Labour and Application of the common Conveniencies of
human Life, more than it uses itself, it will lay up or dispose of, and keep
under some instituted Sign, such as Money, and is rich just to that Degree
and no more. If it provides less than it uses, no Circumstance imaginable,
and least of all extensive Possessions, will prevent it from being poor.
Now let me ask, does the Industry and Activity of one Nation hinder
another from working diligently? Very far from it. It rather serves to excite
them by Imitation. There cannot be the least Interference but when they are
both employed in producing Commodities of the same Kind; and then to be
sure upon the Supposition of equal natural Advantages, the most sober and
diligent People will send them to Market cheapest, and carry away the
Trade. But it is in vain to complain in this Case. The Remedy is only in
ourselves: and the Commodities of Life are so various and innumerable,
that every Country affords Opportunities to its Inhabitants of securing their
own Prosperity, and contributing to that of the whole Earth. The only proper
and just, and indeed the only effectual Way, of one Nation out-stripping
another, is by out working them. When instead of this, we only endeavour
to hinder them from working, or to destroy them, it seems to be little less
absurd than the Measure of the Savage, who meeting a Man wiser than
himself, put him to Death, that he might plunder him of his Wisdom.
Nothing appears to me more ridiculous and pusillanimous than what
we meet with almost every Day in our News-papers, since the late Peace. If
any French Ships are seen at Sea, immediately the Alarm is sounded, and
the Ruin of Britain is at hand. Capt. —— in his Passage met with ——

French Ships in —— Latitude, and they seemed to be steering their Course
for the Gulf of Darien, where, if they effect a Settlement they will carry
away the whole Riches of South-America.—Great Preparations are making
by the French for fishing this Season on the Banks of Newfoundland; and it
is thought they will have more Ships in that Trade than ever they had
before.—The French seem resolved to establish a Settlement and Forts on
some Parts of the African Coast, and if they do, they will ingross the whole
Negro Trade entirely to themselves. When I read such Reflections as these, I
sigh, and say to myself, Oh, my poor Country! Is there no Way of
preserving thee from Destruction but by depriving the whole French Nation
of their Senses? If this is the Case, why should we mince the matter? Let us
aim a Blow at the Root. Let us rise as one Man, pass the Straits of Dover,
and without staying to demolish Dunkirk, let us drive them all before us,
young and old, Male and Female, and drown them in the Mediterranean
Sea.
If this Discourse had not been drawn out to a greater Length than I
intended, it might have been proper to have considered a little how the
Matter has appeared in Fact. Every Person acquainted with History must
acknowledge, that the Places in antient Times, remarkable for Trade, had
but small Territories. Tyre had a very limited Territory. I cannot be precise
as to its Extent, but am certain it was not greater than two or three Shires in
England. Carthage, the Daughter of Tyre, had but little Room for several
Ages; but growing rich and powerful by Commerce, she attempted to
extend her Conquests, and by doing so, brought on her own Destruction. At
this present Time, excepting France and England, the other Places in
Europe where Trade flourishes, have but very narrow Limits. The Dutch,
who as a Nation have deviated as little from the Maxims of sound Policy as
any People on Earth, do not seem at all covetous of much Ground, or many

distant Settlements; yet they are the richest People in Europe, and for their
Numbers the strongest; just because these Numbers are inclosed in so
narrow Bounds. They have indeed very valuable Settlements in the East
Indies, from this single Circumstance, that they ingross the Spice Trade. But
whatever it be to them, it seems to be granted by all who understand the
Subject, that the East-India Trade is hurtful to the rest of Europe.
I fancy to myself that some of my Mercantile Readers will have long
ago perceived that I am no Merchant, and therefore will be saying within
themselves in the most contemptuous Manner, What has this Author to do
with Trade? How can he take upon him to write upon a Subject he does not
understand? I am sure if I was a Merchant, I should reckon myself utterly
unqualified for speaking on the Question which stands at the Head of my
Paper. Actual Merchants are so ingrossed by the Gain or Loss of their own
particular Branches, that it is impossible for them to perceive the Hurt or
Benefit of the whole Body. These proceed upon general principles, on
which any Man of common Understanding may write clearly, and those
who are not Traders themselves must be supposed to judge with the greatest
Impartiality. A Man who is in the Middle of a Crowd, will not perceive so
distinctly, half what is doing in five different Parts of it, or whither the
whole is tending, as he who is removed at a little distance from it, and by
his Situation above it. I remember Dr. Burnet says somewhere, that when
the new-modelling the Government at the Revolution was upon the Tapis,
of all who wrote or spoke on that Subject, none were so much bewilder’d as
the Lawyers. He seems to be surpriz’d at this. But it was no Wonder at all.
For Lawyers were so accustomed to think of the Force of particular
Statutes, that they were every now and then saying, that such and such
Measures were against Law: Than which nothing could be more ridiculous.
For what signified all former Laws, when the Government was to be

resettled from the very Foundation. It was easy to see, that if the
Revolutioners were able to keep their Ground, they would justify
themselves: Whereas if the banish’d Prince had recover’d Possession, he
would have hanged as many as he pleased of his Opposers, though they had
never broke a Law in their Lives, any otherwise than by sending him away.
To draw towards a Conclusion: I am desirous of having the Question
examin’d with Care; and whether this insatiable Desire in our Nation of
such extensive Territories, as must be measured by the Heavens, and
probably never will be perambulated, be not like all selfish interested
Affections in Individuals, Destruction to ourselves. If my Fears are quite
groundless, so much the better for us and our Posterity: If otherwise, it were
to be wish’d that the best Means were pointed out for retarding our Ruin as
much as possible.
If any have been so far moved by what I have said as to wish me to
proceed in mentioning these Means; I answer, let us be well convinced that
the Danger is real, before we come to Particulars. In general however, the
Remedies must be of the same Nature as are prescribed by Physicians,
when the Patient is under a bad Habit, without any acute Disorder, that is to
say, slow and alterative, but radical and fundamental. They must be such as
have an Influence upon the Principles and Manners of the People, and the
Cultivation of the Soil. The first is chiefly necessary, and will produce the
other as its Effect. Yet Agriculture ought to be the Object of immediate
Attention, as it will promote Health and Sobriety among those who are
employed in it; Numbers of People to fill the Cities, and abundance of
Provision for their daily Support. It is demonstrable that all our great Cities
are supplied with Inhabitants from the Country, and therefore whatever
tends to the depopulating of the distant Parts, will in the End prove
Destruction not only to themselves, but the whole.

FINIS.
1

It is probable this Observation will appear somewhat strange to many,
because it is a little out of the common Road. But if they will reflect with
Attention and Accuracy, they will find it conclusive in point of Reasoning,
and confirmed by Experience, in innumerable Instances. Remember, the
Supposition is, that the Excess is prejudicial; now does it not follow that the
greater the Excess, the greater the Prejudice? Try this on every Subject, and
it will be found to hold. If a man is tempted to Luxury, Softness, and
Indulgence, by an affluent Fortune; the greater the Fortune, the more
whimsical, extravagant, and endless his Desires. If a man happens to get
more Applause than he is able to bear, the greater Quantity of Incense you
offer to him, the sooner is his Head turned, and the greater is his
Intoxication. If a General is incommoded in the Day of Battle by the very
Numbers of his own Army, the greater the Multitude, the more
inexpressible the Confusion; the more sudden and dreadful his Defeat.
2

The Severities exercised upon the Indians, have certainly given much pain
to Princes of humanity, among us, who hear of them, as they appear to have
given to several of our Officers who were obliged by their Orders to
commit them. The great absurdity of them in point of Policy will plainly
appear, by comparing the State of these People with our own. There are
three great Stages in the Progress of human Society. The First is, the Savage
State, in which Men subsist by Hunting, and need by far the greatest
Quantity of Ground. The Second, the Pastoral Life; which needs
considerably less than the former, but still a good deal.—And the Last, is
that of Agriculture and Commerce, which needs least of all. Now the
Indians are in the first State; we are in the last; and yet we are never
satisfied, but still driving them into Corners, and obliging them to cede vast
Tracts, which are necessary to them, and which possessed by them, might
be of some use to us, but which without them can be of no Service to us at
all. This Cruelty however, it will be said, tho’ undesirable, was necessary,
because they would not let us alone. It is impossible to believe it. No Briton
at this Time hath so much to say with them as Sir William Johnson; and it isevident he acquired his Influence, not by Cruelty, but by Honesty and
Mercy.
3

Stocking-Weavers, from Nottingham.